 
        Review Article  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Behzad Heidari  (MD) *1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1- Department of Internal 
Medicine, Rouhani Hospital, 
Babol University of Medical 
Sciences, Babol, Iran  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Corresponden ce: 
Behzad Heidari, Professor of 
Internal Medicine, Department 
of Internal Medicine, Rouhani 
Hospital, Babol University of 
Medical Sciences, Babol, Iran   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:  heidaribeh @yahoo.com  
Tel: 0098  111 3298808  
Fax:  0098  111 219403 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Received:  14 May 2011   
Revised :  5 June  2011 
Accepted : 14 June 2011 
  
Knee osteoarthritis  prevalence, risk factors, 
pathogenesis and features : Part I  
 
 
 
 
Abstract  
Osteoarthritis (OA)  a common disease of aged population and one of the leading causes of 
disability. Incidence of knee OA is rising by increasing average age of g eneral population. 
Age, weight, trauma to joint due to repetiting movements in particular squatting  and 
kneeling are common risk factors of knee OA. Several factors including cytokines, leptin, 
and mechanical forces are pathogenic factors of knee OA. In pa tients w ith knee pain 
attribution of pain to knee OA should be considered with caution. Since a proportion of 
knee OA are asymptomatic and in a number  of patients identification of knee OA is not 
possible due to low sensitivity of radiographic examination.  In this review data presented  
in regard to prevalence, pathogenesis, risk factors.  
Key words:  Knee, Osteoarthritis, Pathogenesis, Prevalence.  
 
 
 
Casp ian J Intern Med 2011; 2(2):205-212. 
 Osteoarthritis (OA) is one of the most prevalent condition resultin g to disability 
particularly in elderly population. OA is the most common articular disease of the 
developed world and a leading cause of chronic disability, mostly as a consequence of the 
knee OA and/or hip OA  (1). The economic costs of OA are high, inclu ding those related to 
treatment, for those individuals and their families who must adapt their lives and homes to 
the disease, and those due to lost work productivity  (2).  
Patients with OA are at a higher risk of death compared with the general population  
by OR  of 1.54. History of diabetes, cancer, or cardiovascular disease and the presence of 
walking disability are major risk factors. Excess mortality is observed for all diseases with 
specific causes of death but is particularly pronounced for cardiovascu lar complications. 
Knee OA is more important not only for its high prevalence rate compared with other 
types of OA but also for its presentation at earlier age groups particularly in younger age 
groups of obese women.  The incidence of knee OA increases by age and further increase 
with longer lifetime and higher average weight of the population (3).  
Pain and other symptoms of OA may have a profound effect on quality of life 
affecting both physical function and psychological parameters. Knee OA is not a loca lized 
disease of cartilage alone but is considered as a chronic disease of the whole joint, 
including articular cartilage, meniscus, ligament, and peri -articular muscle that may result 
from multiple pathophysiological mechanisms. It is painful and disablin g disease that 
affects millions of patients (4).   
Despite its severe consequences, however most patients with knee OA can be 
managed in the community and primary care (5).   
  



 
Casp ian J Intern Med 2 (2): Spring   2011  
 206                                  Heidari B . 
Prevalence  
 About 13% of women and 10% of men aged 60 years 
and older have  sympt omatic knee OA.  The proportions of 
people affected with symptomatic knee OA is likely to 
increase due to the aging of the population and the rate of 
obesity or overweight in the general population.(6). During a 
one year period, 25% of people over 55 years may 
demonstrate persistent episode of knee pain,  in whom about 
one in six have to consult their general practitioner about it 
in the same time period. About 10% of people aged over 55 
years have painful disabling knee OA of whom one quarter 
are severely di sabled (5). Prevalence of knee OA in men is 
lower compared with women .This was shown in a meta 
analysis of males and females in which the incidence of knee 
OA in males aged <55 years was lower than females.  
Females, particularly those  ≥55 years, tended to have 
more severe OA in the knee but not in other sites. The results 
of this study demonstrated sex differences incidence of knee 
OA particularly after menopausal age (7). In a prospective 
study  in which data were provided by radiograp hs, physical 
performance assessment, and interviews in 1996 and again 
(with the addition of magnetic resonance imaging 
assessment) in the follow -up visit during the years 2007, 
2008. The prevalence of moderate -to-severe knee 
osteoarthritis changed from 3.7 % at the baseline assessment 
to 26.7% in the follow -up visit eleven years later. Middle -
aged women had a high prevalence of moderate -to-severe 
knee osteoarthritis (8).  The prevalence rates of knee OA vary 
according to study population as well as the method s applied 
for diagnosis.  
The prevalence of radi ographic knee OA ha s been 
investigated in 2282 elderly Japanese people aged ≥  60 years 
(817 men and 1,465 women) living in urban regions. There 
was a high prevalence of radiographic  of Knee OA .The 
prevalence of pain in the knee was age -dependent in women, 
but not in men (9). Symptomatic  knee OA was common 
among the general adult population especially in women of 
older age groups. In a cross -sectional study of 7 communities 
in Greece, symptomatic knee OA was ob served in 6% (95% 
CI 5.6 -6). The prevalence rate was significantly higher 
among women than in men and increased significantly with 
age. Symptomatic knee OA was significantly more common 
in rural compared to urban and suburban populations. 
Logistic regressi on analysis showed a significant association 
of female sex and age ≥50 years with all sites of OA.  In 
addition obesity and low level of education were associated with knee OA (10). Knee symptoms, radiographic knee OA, 
symptomatic knee OA, and severe radiog raphic knee OA 
were calculated in 3018 participants (33%) of African 
Americans (38% men). Diagnosis of knee OA and severity 
of disease was made based on Kellgren -Lawrence 
radiographic grade ≥  2, severe radiographic knee OA as 
grades 3 and 4, and symptomati c knee OA as knee 
symptoms in a knee with radiographic OA. Knee symptoms 
were present in 43%  of patients. Twenty - eight percent of 
symptomatic patients  had radiographic knee OA, 16% had 
symptomatic knee OA, and 8% had severe radiographic knee 
OA. Prevalenc e was higher in older individuals and women. 
African Americans had slightly higher prevalence of knee 
symptoms, radiographic knee OA, and symptomatic knee 
OA, but significantly higher prevalence of severe 
radiographic knee OA compared to Caucasians (11).  
 
 
Relationship between knee pain and radiographic 
changes  
Knee pain is an imprecise marker of radiographic knee 
osteoarthritis which is partly dependent to extent of 
radiographic involvement. Similarly, radiographic knee OA 
is an imprecise guide to the lik elihood that knee pain or 
disability will be present. Both associations are affected by 
the definition of pain used and the nature of the study group. 
The results of knee X rays should not be used in isolation 
when assessing individual patients with knee p ain (12). 
Many individuals with radiographic knee OA are 
asymptomatic and in contrary in many patients with knee 
pain suggestive of OA radiol ogic findings are absent. Based 
on clinical examination and history presence of knee OA can 
be suggested and demons tration of radiologic manifestations 
may be predicted. For example , in a study of patients with 
various skeletal manifestations presence of some clinical and 
or demographic information  such as age, sex, body mass 
index, absence of whole leg pain, difficul ty in descending 
stairs, palpable effusion, fixed -flexion deformity, restricted -
flexion range of motion, and crepitus predicted knee OA at 
sensitivity of 94% and specificity of 93%. In this study , knee 
pain was associated with more severe disease s defined as 
KL>  3 rather than milder OA defined as KL=2, in women 
than in men (13). Available data suggest that the symptoms 
of knee OA are rather weakly associated with radiographic 
findings and vice versa (9 , 12). In a systematic literature 
review,  15-76% of thos e with knee pain had radiographic 

 
Casp ian J Intern Med 2(2): Spring 2 011 
Knee osteoarthritis                                207 
OA and 15 -81% of those with radiographic knee OA had 
pain (12). At present the relation between joints lesions and 
pain is assessed by conventional radiography which is not 
sensitive enough and has several limitations. In patients 
suspected to knee OA presence of osteophytes in all knee 
views (AP, lateral or skyline) predicts knee pain more 
accurately than joint space narrowing on all knee 
radiographic views (14).   
In middle -aged women, there were significant 
associations between pain, radiographic severity of OA of 
the knee, and seven MR imaging -identified parameters ( 15). 
Although the presence of osteophytes had the strongest 
association with knee pain "ever' with an odds ratio for 
skyline osteophytes of 7. 56, and antero posterior osteophytes 
of 5.There was a trend for an association between the 
severity of narrowing in the lateral and skyline views and  
knee pain, but  the association between joint space narrowing 
and knee pain was not statistically significant. In anothe r 
study , of one-hundred six OA knees in 68 subjects (mean 
age 71.1 years; 85% women) who were followed up in every 
6-month interval over 36 months , the subjects with knees 
who had joint space narrowing had more severe symptoms, 
and the symptoms tended to b e worse for those with higher 
rates of narrowing. A significant correlation was not found 
between the severity of symptoms and the growth of 
osteophytes The result of this study in contr ast to previous 
studies indicated an association between the symptoms of 
knee OA and progression of  joint  space narrowing (16).  
The differences in association of joint space narrowing 
and knee pain may be partly explained by biomechanical 
component. Biomechanical factor may change an 
asymptomatic radiographic OA to a symp tomatic disease. 
Among the individuals with mild radiographic knee OA 
(K/L grade 2), those who are symptomatic have significantly 
higher medial compartment loads than those who are 
asymptomatic, whereas, those who are asymptomatic do not 
differ from normal  controls (asymptomatic K/L grade 0 or 1) 
(17). Among the community men and women presence of 
osteophyte is the radiographic feature that associates best 
with knee pain in both women and men. Therefore, 
radiographic assessment of both tibiofemoral and 
patelofemoral regions should be included in all community 
studies. Joint space loss is not a feature of asymptomatic 
aging, and there is not a biological cut off for joint space 
width below which the likelihood of knee pain markedly 
increases (18).  The capabi lity of MRI to visualize structural lesions 
within the knee joint is greater, and there is a growing body 
of work using MRI for the diagnosis of knee OA as well as 
to examine the correlation between structural findings and 
knee symptoms.  
In large cohort st udies, synovial hypertrophy, synovial 
effusions, and abnormalities in the subchondral bone have 
been associated with knee pain (19). Bone attrition detected 
on conventional x -rays using a simple cheap technique is 
strongly associated with the presence of d ay pain, stiffness 
and disability in knee OA. Bone pathology was reported in 
74% of those with radiographic bone attrition compared with 
42% of those without bone attrition (2 0). 
In a systematic review of previous studies in which the 
types of MRI lesions associated with knee pain has been 
investigated. The presence of bone marrow lesions was 
associated with knee OA pain with OR of 2 to 5.  The OR of 
having pain in the presence of effusion/synovitis ranged 
between 3.and 10.0. These findings may indicate that  bone 
marrow edema. Effusion / synovitis being the origin of pain 
in knee OA (21). In another study of comparing radiographic 
and MRI findings of knee OA ,there was a significant 
association between pain, radiographic severity of knee OA 
and seven  paramet ers identified by MR imaging.In this 
study defects of cartilage, osteophytes, sclerosis, meniscal or 
ligamentous tears, joint effusion, and synovitis were strongly 
related to increasing Kellgren -Lawrence grade (15). In 
persons with knee OA, knee pain sever ity was associated 
with subarticular bone attrition, bone marrow lesions, 
synovitis/effusion, and meniscal tears. The contribution of 
bone marrow lesions to pain severity appeared to require the 
presence of bone attrition (22).  
 
 
Etiology and risk factors  of knee OA  
OA has a multifactorial etiologies, which occurs due to 
interplay between systemic and local factors. Osteoarthritis 
affects all ages. The etiology of this debilitating disease in 
which several responsible genes are linked for its occurance. 
Sports participation, injury to the joint, obesity, and genetic 
susceptibility predispose adolescent athletes to the 
development of premature osteoarthritis. Previous knee 
trauma increases the risk of knee OA 3.86 times (23). Old 
age, female gender, overwei ght and obesity, knee injury, 
repetitive use of joints, bone density, muscle weakness, and 
joint laxity all play roles in the development of joint OA 

 
Casp ian J Intern Med 2 (2): Spring   2011  
 208                                  Heidari B . 
Determination of risk factors  particularly in the weight -
bearing joints and their modification  may reduc e the risk of 
OA and prevent subsequent pain and disability (6,  26). 
Mechanical forces exerted on the joints are a significant 
cause of OA and one of the most modifiable risk factors as 
determined by body BMI. Female sex, lower educational 
levels, obesity,  and poor muscular strength are associated 
with symptomatic disease and subsequent disability (25).  
In a review of literature 14 contributing variables 
including occupational (extrinsic) and personal (intrinsic) 
were considered as risk factors. Two factor s of kneeling and 
squatting are considered the main primary risk factors in 
correlation with knee disorders (26).  
Frequent squatting predispose people to development of 
knee OA. Aapproximately 40% of men and approximately 
68% of women reported squatting ≥ 1 hour per day at age 
25.Prolonged squatting is a strong risk factor for 
tibiofemoral knee OA among elderly (27). Occupation 
involving squatting or kneeling more than two hours daily 
were associated with two -fold significantly increased risk of 
moderate to  severe radiographic knee OA. Obesity alone or 
in patients with metabolic syndrome increases the risk of 
radiographic knee OA but has a lesser effect progression of 
knee OA (28 , 29). Relationship between BMI and OA of the 
knee is mainly linear, and duratio n of increased joint loading 
or gaining weight is also significant.Twenty seven percent of 
cases of hip arthroplasty and 69% knee arthroplasty may be 
attributed to obesity ( 1). In a systematic literature search 
obesity was consistently the main factors wit h knee OA by 
OR=2.63 (23).   
Obesity is also associated with the hip and hand OA.This 
indicates that excess adipose tissue produces humoral 
factors, altering articular cartilage metabolism. It has been 
postulated that the leptin system could be a link betw een 
metabolic abnormalities in obesity and increased risk of OA 
(29). Miniscal surgery increases the risk of future knee OA 
by 2.6 times (30).  Patients undergoing partial meniscectomy 
and reconstruction surgery are significantly more likely to 
develop rad iographic evidence of osteoarthritis than those 
with normal menisci (3 1). Inflammatory process has been 
shown to be associated  with OA. Inflammation may have a 
contributive role in the development and progression of OA. 
In one study the median level of hig h sensitive CRP in 
progressive knee OA was higher than n on-progressive 
disease  (32). The median value of CRP is significantly 
associated with functional disability, joint tenderness, pain, fatigue, global severity, and depression in OA.  Mean CRP 
level in OA is greater than healthy individuals (33).  
In a study of relationship between biochemical markers 
of arthritis and the radiographic grading of osteoarthritis 
(OA) in knees , a significant relationship was found between 
the joint space width and radiograph ic knee OA. The joint 
space width decreased with increasing Kellgren -Lawrence 
grade. Pyridinoline and TIMP -1 exhibited a significant 
relationship to the Kellgren -Lawrence grade but only urinary 
pyridinoline had a significant correlation (34).In another 
study, raised serum CRP at entry was predictor of knee OA 
progression.  Serum CRP at entry was not predictive of 
progression between entry and five years but serum CRP at -
3 years was predictive of progression by OR=1.95 ( 35). 
Female sex was a strong risk fact or even in the subgroup 
without radiographic knee OA (KL=0/1) (36) For instance, 
the greater total body fat of the average adult female may 
partially account for the gender disparity toward OA, given 
that females theoretically demonstrate higher levels of 
adipose derived systemic leptin concentrations than their 
male counterparts.(36). Female gender increases the risk of 
knee OA 1.84 times (23). In patients with knee OA 
particularly at early stage of the levels of serum vitamin D is 
significantly lower than   individuals without knee 
OA.Vitamin D deficiency increases the risk of knee OA by 
OR=2.63 (37). Higher than 6 pregnancies increases the rik of 
knee OA by 1.95 times (38).  
 
Table 1.  Risk factors of knee osteoarthritis  
Age 
Genetic susceptibility  
Obesity  
Female gender  
Trauma  
Repetitive knee trauma  
Muscle weakness  
Joint laxity  
Mechanical forces  
Kneeling  
Squatting  
Miniscal injuries  
______________________________________________  
 
Physiopathology  
The development of OA is dependent to interactions 
between sever al factors and so this process may be 

 
Casp ian J Intern Med 2(2): Spring 2 011 
Knee osteoarthritis                                209 
considered the product of an interplay between systemic and 
local factors  (6). This progressive and disabling disease can 
be resulted from a combination of risk factors, including 
advancing age, genetics, trauma, knee malalignment, 
increased biomechanical loading of joints through obesity, 
augmented bone density and an imbalance in physiological 
processes (39). There is now a growing body of evidence 
that obesity is a complex syndrome in which an abnormal 
activation of neuroendocrine and pro -inflammatory pathways 
leads to an altered control of food intake, fat expansion and 
metabolic changes.Activated white adipose tissue increases 
the synthesis of pro -inflammatory cytokines, such as IL -6, 
IL-1, IL -8, TNF  alpha,  IL-18, but decreases the regulatory 
cytokines,such as IL -10 (40).  This observation supports the 
link between obesity and OA. The obesity gene and its 
product leptin may have important implications for the onset 
and progression of OA.  
However, leptin can be also produced by osteoblasts and 
chondrocytes cells and local production of this substance 
may be of great importance.Significant levels of leptin were 
observed in the cartilage and osteophytes of people with OA,  
whereas few chondrocytes produced leptin in the cartilage of 
healthy people (36). Leptin was found in synovial fluids of 
OA joints which was correlated with BMI (41 , 42). 
Cytokines,  biomechanical factors, and proteolytic enzymes 
lead to  vaiable degrees of synovial inflamatory process 
which  up -regulate  metalloproteinases  and blunt 
chondrocyte compensatory synthesis pathways required to 
restore the integrity of the degraded matrix (43).  
A cascade of changes in joint structure start from 
subchondral bone expansion, bone marrow lesions, meniscal 
tears an d extrusion, to cartilage defects,which ultimately may 
lead to cartilage loss and radiographic osteoarthritis at late 
stage.  Considerable evidence indicates that the menisci, 
ligaments, periarticular muscles and the joint capsule are also 
involved in the O A process. Even infrapatellar fat pad from 
patients with knee -OA contains inflammatory cells which 
can partly lead to pain in the anterior area of the knee  OA 
(44). Extravasation of the immune cells from infrapatellar fat 
pad inflammatory cells which can l ead to vasodilation and 
extravasation of the immune cells that could in part be 
responsible for anterior pain in knee -OA (44).  
 
Clinical features  
Persist knee pain, limited morning stiffness, and reduced 
function are the three symptoms that are recommende d for the diagnosis of knee OA by the EULAR (45). In addition 
cripitus,  restriction of joint movement and bony enlargement 
are also very useful for diagnosis of knee OA.  
Pain is the most common symptom in knee OA, a leading 
cause of chronic disability, an d a major source of the 
disability attributable to OA.  Pain severity ranging from 
barely perceptible to immobilizing. Pain,  in knee OA  
typically exacerbates by activity and relieves  by rest. In the 
presence of the above six symptoms and signs the 
probabi lity of having radiographic knee OA increases to 
99% (4 6).  
In advanced  cases synovities may appear and leads to 
pain at rest or night. Short duration of stiffness less than 30 
minutes may be seen in OA patients in the morning or 
following periods of inact ivity.  
Tenderness to palpation of involved joints may be 
evident in physical examination. Joint effusions may be 
present, which typically exhibit a mild pleocytosis, normal 
viscosity, and modestly elevated protein .Crepitus during 
joint motion or walking is a common .Limitation of range of 
motion are all common signs of OA of the knee. In advanced 
cases (46) malalignment may be apparent (genu varus or 
genu valgus).  
 
 
Imaging  
Although the diagnosis of knee OA in the most cases can 
be made by  the clinical  findings and physical examination 
,however  identification of joint damages are necessary for 
both diagmostic confirmation as well as extent of joint 
involvement. Conventional plain radiographs is the first 
diagnostic procedure as usually requested to demo nstrate the 
structure -pain relationship in knee OA . Radiographic 
examination has several limitations wheras MRI has the 
capability to visualize all the structures within the knee joint. 
There is a growing body of work using MRI to examine the 
correlation b etween structural findings and symptoms (47). 
Conventional radiography predominantly visualizes bone 
whereas MRI has the ability to directly visualize all the 
structures of a joint, including soft tissue and cartilage. 
subchondral bone marrow lesions (48) .  
Subchondral bone marrow abnormalities determined by 
MRI have recently been shown to be predictors of 
radiographic progression in patients with knee OA (49). 
Greater levels of structural changes at earlier stage can be 
revealed by MRI  

 
Casp ian J Intern Med 2 (2): Spring   2011  
 210                                  Heidari B . 
Plain radiography  
Identification of bone changes in early knee OA may not 
be possible due to low sensitivity of radiogragpy. However 
when articular changes have been observed by plain 
radiography further imaging studies  are unnecessary.  The 
major radiographic features of OA include:  Joint space 
narrowing,  subchondral sclerosis,  osteophytes,  subchondral 
cysts (table 2).  Chondrocalcinosis may be seen in 4.4% of 
patients which may increase by aging (50)  
Non-weight -bearing and weight -bearing radiographs of 
the knee in extension w ere found to be of limited value in 
assessing disease status, whereas all standing flexed knee 
positions reliably imaged joint space width and bone changes 
in the tibiofemoral joint. Skyline rather than lateral views of 
the patellofemoral joint were better  at detecting joint changes 
in osteoarthritis (51) Non -weight -bearing and weight -bearing 
radiographs of the knee in extension were found to be of 
limited value in assessing disease status, whereas all 
standing flexed knee positions reliably imaged joint sp ace 
width and bone changes in the tibiofemoral joint (52) . The 
presence of osteophyte at the patellofemoral joint was more 
sensitive but less specific than at the tibiofemoral joint. 
Among men and women in the community, osteophyte is the 
radiographic feat ure that associates best with knee pain. 
Radiographic assessment of both regions of tibiofemoral and 
patellofemoral should be included in all studies.In patients 
with knee pain proportion of patients with osteophyte at 
patellofemoral joint is greater than tibiofemoral joint and can 
induce disability in the absence of tibiofemoral abnormality 
Joint space loss is not a feature of asymptomatic aging, and 
there is not a biological cut off for joint space width below 
which the likelihood of knee pain markedly in creases (53) . 
 
 
MR imaging   
MRI is not necessary for most patients with suggestive 
symptoms of OA and/or typical plain radiographic features. 
However, MRI of the knee has a diagnostic role in patients 
with joint pain and symptoms such as locking, popping, or 
instability that suggest meniscal or ligamentous damage. The 
presence of two MRI findings concomitantly correlates with 
painful OA of the knee. Several types of lesions may be 
expected to be observed in knee OA by MRI imaging. These 
include cartilage ab normalities, osteophytes, bone edema, 
subarticular cysts, bone attrition, meniscal tears, ligament abnormalities, synovial thickening, joint effusion, intra -
articular loose bodies, and periarticular cysts ( 47-49) table 2.  
 
 Table 2 - Radiographic and MRI fi ndings in knee osteoarthritis  
 
1- Radiographic findings  
Osteophytes  
Joint space narrowing  
Subchondral sclerosis  
Subchonderal cysts  
2- MRI findings in knee osteoarthritis  
Cartilage abnormalities,  
Csteophytes,  
Bone edema,  
Subarticular cysts,  
Bone attritio n,  
Meniscal tears,  
Ligament abnormalities  
Synovial thickening,  
Joint effusion  
Intra -articular loose bodies  
Periarticular cysts  
 
Laboratory findings  
Although mild synovitis may be seen in patients with 
knee OA but markers of inflammation such as erythrocy te 
sedimentation rate (ESR) and C –reactive protein (CRP) 
levels are usually normal.  Synovial fluid in knee OA is of 
non-inflammatory type. Serum and synovial fluid levels of 
CRP in OA are markedly lower than inflammatory arthritis. 
Synovial fluid anti -cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody is 
negative in both serum and synovial fluid of patients with 
knee OA.  In suspected cases of knee OA synovial fluid level 
of anti -CCP can be used for differentiation of OA from RA 
(55).  The rest of this Review Article wil l appear in the next 
issue.  
 
 
References  
1. Grazio S , Balen D .Obesity: Risk factor and predictors of 
osteoarthritis  2009; 131: 22 -6. 
2. Altman RD . Early management o f osteoarthritis. Am J 
Manag Care  2010; 16 Suppl  Management:  S41-7. 
3. Bliddal H , Christensen R .The treatment and prevention 
of knee osteoarthritis: a tool for clinical decision -making. 
Expert Opin Pharmacother  2009;  10:1793 -804. 

 
Casp ian J Intern Med 2(2): Spring 2 011 
Knee osteoarthritis                                211 
4. Hayami T . Osteoarthritis of the  knee joint as a cause of 
musculoskeletal ambulation disability symptom complex 
(MADS). Clin Calcium  2008; 18:1574 -80. {In Japanese}  
5. Peat G , McCarney R , Croft P .Knee pain and 
osteoarthritis in older adults: a review of community 
burden and current use of primary health care. Ann 
Rheum Dis  2001; 60: 91 -7. 
6. Zhang Y , Jordan JM . Epidemiology of osteoarthritis. Clin 
Geriatr Med  2010; 26: 355 -69. 
7. Srikanth VK , Fryer JL , Zhai G , et al. A meta -analysis of 
sex differences prevalence, incidence and severity of 
osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage  2005;  13:769 -81. 
8. Sowers M , Karvonen -Gutierrez CA , Jacobson JA , Jiang 
Y, Yosef M .Associations of anatomical measures from 
MRI with radiographically defined knee  osteoarthritis 
score, pain, and physical functioning. J Bone Joint Surg 
Am 2011; 93: 241 -51. 
9. Muraki S , Oka H , Akune  T, et al .Prevalence of 
radiographic knee osteoarthritis and its association with 
knee pain in the elderly of Japanese population -based 
cohorts: the ROAD study. Osteoarthritis Cartilage  2009; 
17:1137 -43.  
10. Andrianakos AA , Kontelis LK , Karamitsos DG , et al. 
Prevalence of symptomatic knee, hand, and hip 
osteoarthritis in Greece. The ESORDI G study. J 
Rheumatol  2006; 33: 2507 -13. 
11. Jordan JM , Helmick CG , Renner JB , et al.  Prevalence of 
knee symptoms and radiographic and symptomatic knee 
osteoarthritis in African Americans and Caucasians: the 
Johnston County Osteoarthritis Project. J Rheumatol  
2007; 34:172 -80. 
12. Bedson J , Croft PR .The discordance between clinical and 
radiographic knee osteoarthritis: a systematic search and  
summary of the literature. BMC Musculoskelet Disord  
2008; 9:116.  
13. Peat G , Thomas E , Duncan R , et al. Estimating the 
probability of radiog raphic osteoarthritis in the older patient 
with knee pain. Arthritis Rheum.  2007; 15; 57: 794 -802. 
14. Cicuttini FM , Baker J , Hart DJ , Spector TD .Association 
of pain with radiological changes in different 
compartments and views of the knee joint. Osteoarthritis 
Cartilage  1996; 4: 143 -7. 
15. Hayes CW , Jamadar DA , Welch GW , et al. Osteoarthritis 
of the knee: comparison of MR imaging findings with 
radiographic severity me asurements and pain in middle -
aged women. Radiology  2005; 237: 998 -1007.  16. Fukui N , Yamane S , Ishida S , et al .Relationship between 
radiographic changes and symptoms or physical  
examination findings in subjects with symptomatic 
medial knee osteoarthritis: a three -year prospective study. 
BMC Musculoskelet Disord  2010; 11: 269.  
17. Thorp LE , Sumner DR , Wimmer MA , Block JA . 
Relationship between pain and medial knee joint loading 
in mild radiographic knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum  
2007; 57: 1254 -60. 
18. Lanyon P , O'Reilly S , Jones A , Doherty M . Radiographic 
assessment of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis in the 
community: definitions and normal joint space. Ann 
Rheum Dis  1998; 57: 595 -601. 
19. Wenham CY , Conaghan PG . Imaging the painful 
osteoarthritic knee joint: what hav e we learned? Nat Clin 
Pract Rheumatol  2009; 5: 149 -58. 
20. Reichenbach S , Dieppe PA , Nüesch E , et al. Association 
of bone attrition with knee pain, stiffness and disability: a 
cross -sectional study. Ann Rheum Dis  2011; 70: 293 -8.  
21. Yusuf E , Kortekaas MC , Watt I, Huizinga TW , 
Kloppenburg M . Do knee abnormalities visualised on 
MRI explai n knee pain in knee osteoarthritis? A 
systematic review. Ann Rheum Dis  2011; 70: 60 -7.  
22. Magliano M . Obesity and arthritis. Menopause Int  2008; 
14: 149 -54. 
23. Blagojevic M , Jinks C , Jeffery A , Jordan KP . Risk 
factors for onset of osteoarthritis of the knee in older 
adults: a systematic review and meta -analysis. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage  2010; 18: 24 -33. 
24. Nicholson S , Dickman K , Maradiegue A . Reducing 
premature osteoarthritis in the adolescent through 
appropriate scre ening.  J Pediatr Nurs  2009; 24: 69 -74.  
25. Lementowski PW , Zelicof SB . Obesity and osteoarthritis.  
Am J Orthop (Belle Mead NJ).  2008; 37:148 -51. 
26. Reid CR , Bush PM , Cummings NH , McMullin DL , 
Durrani SK . A review of occupational knee disorders . J 
Occup Rehabil  2010; 20: 489 -501. 
27. Zhang Y , Hunter DJ , Nevitt MC ,et al.Association of 
squatting with increased prevalence of radiographic 
tibiofemoral knee osteoarthritis: the Beijing 
Osteoarthritis Study. Arthritis Rheum  2004; 50: 1187 -92. 
28. Yoshimura N , Muraki S , Oka H , et al. Association of 
Knee Osteoarthritis with the Accumulation of Metabolic 
Risk Factors Such as Overweight, Hypertension, 
Dyslipidemia, and Impaired Glucose Tolerance in 
Japanese Me n and Women: The ROAD Study. J 
Rheumatol  2011; 35: 921 -30. 

 
Casp ian J Intern Med 2 (2): Spring   2011  
 212                                  Heidari B . 
29. Grazio S , Balen D . Obesity: risk factor and predictor of 
osteoarthritis.  Lijec Vjesn  2009; 131: 22 -6. {In Croatian}  
30. Nicholson S , Dickman K , Maradiegue A . Reducing 
premature osteoarthritis in the adolescent through 
appropriate  screening.  J Pediatr Nurs  2009; 24: 69 -74.  
31. Magnussen RA , Mansour AA , Carey JL , Spindler KP . 
Meniscus status at anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction associated with radiographic signs of 
osteoarthritis at 5 - to 10 -year follow -up: a systematic 
review.  J Knee Surg  2009; 22: 347 -57. 
32. Martel -Pelletier J , Pelletier JP .Is osteoarthritis a disease 
involving only cartilage or other articular tissues?  Eklem 
Hastalik Cerrahisi  2010; 21: 2 -14. 
33. Wolfe F .The C -reactive protein but not erythrocyte 
sedimentat ion rate is associated with clinical severity in 
patients with osteoarthritis of the knee or hip. J 
Rheumatol  1997; 24:1486 -8. 
34. Takahashi M , Naito K , Abe M , Sawada T , Nagano 
A.Relationship between radiographic grading of 
osteoarthritis and the biochemical markers for arthritis in 
knee osteoarthritis --Arthritis Res Ther  2004; 6: R208 -12. 
35. Sharif M , Shepstone L , Elson CJ , Dieppe PA , Kirwan 
JR.\Increased serum C reactive protein may reflect events 
that precede r adiographic progression in osteoarthritis of 
the knee. Ann Rheum Dis  2000; 59: 71 -4. 
36. Teichtahl AJ , Wluka AE , Proietto J , Cicuttini FM . 
Obesity and the female sex, risk factors for knee 
osteoarthritis that may be attributable to systemic or local 
leptin biosynthesis and its cellular effects.  Med 
Hypotheses  2005; 65: 312 -5. 
37. Heidari B, Heidari P, Hajian -Tilaki K. Association 
between serum vitamin D deficiency and knee 
osteoarthritis. Int Orthop 2010; 30. [Epub ahead of print]  
38. Heidari B,Hajian K. Previous pregnancies and 
subsequent risk of knee osteoarthritis, J Res Med Sci 
2000; 2: 71 -8. 
39. Eaton CB . Obesity as a risk factor for os teoarthritis: 
mechanical versus metabolic. Med Health R I.  2004; 87: 
201-4. 
40. Iannone F , Lapadula G . Obesity and inflammation --
targets for OA therapy. Curr Drug Targets  2010; 11: 586 -98. 
41. Dumond H , Presle N , Terlain B , et al.  Evidence for a key 
role of leptin in osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum.  2003;  48: 
3118 -29. 
42. Terlain B , Dumond H , Presle N ,et al . Is leptin the 
missing link between osteoarthritis and obesity? Ann 
Pharm Fr  2005; 63: 186 -93. {In French}  43. Fernandes JC , Martel -Pelle tier J , Pelletier JP .The role of 
cytokines in osteoarthritis pathophysiology  Biorheology 
2002; 39: 237 -46. 
44. Clockaerts S , Bastiaansen -Jenniskens YM , Runhaar J, et 
al. The infrapatellar fat pad should be considered as an 
active osteo arthritic joint tissue: a narrative review. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage  2010; 18: 876 -82. 
45. Zhang W , Doherty M , Peat G , et al. EULAR evidence -
based recommendations for the diagnosis of knee 
osteoarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis  2010; 69: 483 -9.  
46. Heidari B . Rheumatic diseases. 1st ed. Babol; Iran Babol 
university of medical sciences publication, 2002.  
47. Wenham CY , Conaghan PG . Imaging the painful 
osteoarthritic knee joint: what have we learned? Nat Clin 
Pract  Rheumatol  2009; 5: 149 -58. 
48. Conaghan PG , Felson DT . Structural associations of 
osteoarthritis pain: lessons from magnetic resonance 
imaging. Novartis Found Symp  2004; 260: 191 -201; 
discussion 201 -5, 277 -9. 
49. Garnero P , Peterfy C , Zaim S , Schoenharting M . Bone 
marrow abnormalities on magnetic resonance imaging 
are associated with type II collagen degradation in knee 
osteoarthritis: a t hree-month longitudinal study. Arthritis 
Rheum  2005; 52: 2822 -9. 
50. Felson DT , Anderson JJ , Naimark A , Kannel W , Meenan 
RF.The prevalence of chondrocalcinosis in the elderly 
and its association with knee osteoarthritis: the 
Framingham  Study. J Rheumatol  1989;  16:1241 -5. 
51. Buckland -Wright C .Which radiographic techniques 
should we use for research and clinical practice? Best 
Pract Res Clin Rheumatol  2006; 20: 39 -55. 
52. Lotke PA , Ecker ML , Barth P , Lonner JH . Subchondral 
magnetic resonance imaging changes in early 
osteoarthrosis associated with tibial osteonecrosis. 
Arthro scopy  2000; 16: 76 -81. 
53. Guermazi A , Zaim S , Taouli B , et al. MR findings in 
knee osteoarthritis. Eur Radiol  2003; 13: 1370 -86.  
54. Sukenik S , Henkin J , Zimlichman  S, et al. Serum and 
synovial fluid levels of serum amyloid A protein and C -
reactive protein in inflammatory and noninflammatory 
arthritis. J Rheumatol  1988; 15: 942 -5. 
55. Heidari B, Abedi H, Firouzjahi A, Heidari P. Diagnostic 
value of synovial fluid anti -cyclic citrullinated peptide 
antibody for rheumatoid arthritis.Rheumatol Int 2010; 
30:1465 -70.  
 

