Criteria
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1580–1588. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.138461 1580  
Accepted 28 June 2010
 This article is published 
 simultaneously in the September 2010 issue of  Arthritis & Rheumatism .
Supported by the American 
College of Rheumatology and the European League Against Rheumatism.   ABSTRACT 
  Objective   The 1987 American College of Rheumatology 
(ACR; formerly the American Rheumatism Association) 
classiﬁ  cation criteria for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have been criticised for their lack of sensitivity in early disease. This work was undertaken to develop new classiﬁ  cation criteria for RA.    Methods   A joint working group from the ACR and the 
European League Against Rheumatism developed, in three phases, a new approach to classifying RA. The work focused on identifying, among patients newly presenting with undifferentiated inﬂ  ammatory synovitis, factors that best discriminated between those who were and those who were not at high risk for persistent and/or erosive disease—this being the appropriate current paradigm underlying the disease construct ‘RA’.    Results   In the new criteria set, classiﬁ  cation as ‘deﬁ  nite 
RA’ is based on the conﬁ  rmed presence of synovitis in at least one joint, absence of an alternative diagnosis better explaining the synovitis, and achievement of a total score of 6 or greater (of a possible 10) from the individual scores in four domains: number and site of involved joints (range 0–5), serological abnormality (range 0–3), elevated acute-phase response (range 0–1) and symptom duration (two levels; range 0–1).    Conclusion   This new classiﬁ  cation system redeﬁ  nes the 
current paradigm of RA by focusing on features at earlier stages of disease that are associated with persistent and/or erosive disease, rather than deﬁ  ning the disease by its late-stage features. This will refocus attention on the important need for earlier diagnosis and institution of effective disease-suppressing therapy to prevent or minimise the occurrence of the undesirable sequelae that currently comprise the paradigm underlying the disease construct ‘RA’.      
 Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inﬂ  amma-
tory disease characterised by joint swelling, joint 
tenderness and destruction of synovial joints, lead-ing to severe disability and premature mortality. 
 1  –  5   
Given the presence of autoantibodies, such as rheu-matoid factor (RF) and anti-citrullinated protein antibody (ACPA) (tested as anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide), which can precede the clinical manifesta-tion of RA by many years, 
 6  –  9   RA is considered an 
autoimmune disease.  10     11   Autoimmunity and the 
overall systemic and articular inﬂ  ammatory load 
drive the destructive progression of the disease. 
However, although structural changes, which can be visualised by conventional radiography or other imaging techniques, best distinguish RA from other arthritic disorders, 
 12   joint damage is rarely apparent 
in the very early stages of disease, but rather accu-
mulates consistently over time.  13  –  16   
 Over the last decade, the optimal use of disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARD), in par-
ticular the anchor DMARD methotrexate,  17  –  19   and 
the availability of new biological agents,  11     20   have 
dramatically enhanced the success of RA man-
agement. Moreover, it has been recognised that early therapeutic intervention improves clinical outcomes and reduces the accrual of joint damage and disability. 
 21  –  23       Undoubtedly, treating patients 
at a stage at which evolution of joint destruction 
can still be prevented would be ideal. However, at         2010 Rheumatoid arthritis classiﬁ  cation criteria: an 
American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism collaborative initiative  
    Daniel   Aletaha,   1      Tuhina   Neogi,   2      Alan J   Silman,   3      Julia   Funovits,   1      David T   Felson,   2   
   Clifton O   Bingham III,   4      Neal S   Birnbaum,   5      Gerd R   Burmester,   6      Vivian P   Bykerk,   7   
   Marc D   Cohen,   8      Bernard   Combe,   9      Karen H   Costenbader,   10      Maxime   Dougados,   11   
   Paul   Emery,   12      Gianfranco   Ferraccioli,   13      Johanna MW   Hazes,   14      Kathryn   Hobbs,   15   
   Tom WJ   Huizinga,   16      Arthur   Kavanaugh,   17      Jonathan   Kay,   18      Tore K   Kvien,   19   
   Timothy   Laing,   20      Philip   Mease,   21      Henri A   Ménard,   22      Larry W   Moreland,   23   
   Raymond   L Naden,   24      Theodore   Pincus,   25      Josef S   Smolen,   1      Ewa   Stanislawska-Biernat,   26   
   Deborah   Symmons,   27      Paul P   Tak,   28      Katherine S   Upchurch,   18      J iří   Vencovský,   29   
   Frederick   Wolfe,   30      Gillian   Hawker,   31    
   For numbered afﬁ  liations see 
end of article 
  Correspondence to   
Dr Alan J Silman, Arthritis Research UK, Copeman House, Chesterﬁ  eld S41 7TD, UK; a.silman@arthritisresearchuk.o r g .                                  ▶  This criteria set has been approved by the 
American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 
Board of Directors and the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) Executive Committee.
▶  This signiﬁ  es that the criteria set has been 
quantitatively validated using patient data, and it has undergone validation based on an external data set.
▶  All ACR/EULARapproved criteria sets are 
expected to undergo intermittent updates.
▶  The American College of Rheumatology is 
an independent, professional, medical and scientiﬁ  c society which does not guarantee, warrant, or endorse any commercial product or service.
03_annrheumdis138461.indd   158003_annrheumdis138461.indd   1580 8/16/2010   5:16:53 PM8/16/2010   5:16:53 PM

Criteria
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1580–1588. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.138461 1581these factors and their weights using a series of ‘paper patients’, 
as well as to identify any other factors that may be of relevance based on current clinical thinking. Phase 3, which is the focus of this report, describes the derivation, from the previous two phases, of the ﬁ  nal classiﬁ  cation criteria set. The details of the 
methods and results from Phases 1 and 2 are provided else-where, 
 25     26   and are brieﬂ  y summarised below. 
  Phase 1 
 The aim of Phase 1 was to identify the contributions of clini-
cal and laboratory variables that in practice were the most predictive of the decision to initiate DMARD therapy in a population of patients with early undifferentiated synovitis. Initiation of DMARD therapy was used as an indicator of the physician’s opinion that the patient was at risk of develop-ing persistent and/or erosive arthritis that we would currently consider to be RA. Data on 3115 patients from nine early arthritis cohorts who were considered not to have evidence of another possible diagnosis explaining their presentation were obtained. Between July 2007 and November 2008 an expert working group developed an analysis strategy that related an agreed-upon list of standardised clinical and laboratory vari-ables collected at baseline to the initiation of DMARD treat-ment within the next 12 months. Methotrexate initiation was used as the gold standard for this purpose. The analyti-cal process aimed to identify the independent contribution of each variable on this list and included univariate regression modelling, a subsequent principal components analysis, and a multivariate regression model that included all identiﬁ  ed com-
ponents. 
 25   The resulting list of informative variables identiﬁ  ed 
during that process and the weights based on the odds ratios 
are shown in  table 1 .  
  Phase 2 
 Phase 2 consisted of a consensus-based, decision science-
 informed approach, which took place between November 2008 
and June 2009. The purpose of this phase was to derive a cli-nician-based judgement on the relative contribution of clinical and laboratory factors deemed to be important in inﬂ  uencing 
the probability of developing ‘persistent inﬂ  ammatory and/or 
erosive arthritis that is currently considered to be RA’ (hereinaf-ter referred to as ‘developing RA’). 
 An expert panel was assembled, comprising 12 rheumatolo-
gists from Europe and 12 from North America with extensive 
experience in the diagnosis and management of RA. They provided real-life case scenarios of patients with early undif-ferentiated inﬂ  ammatory arthritis representing low to high present, clinical trials of RA treatments are hampered by lack of criteria allowing for study enrolment of patients at early stages of disease. Thus, to date it has not been possible effectively to investigate the efﬁ  cacy of early interventions in terms of their ability to prevent later-stage RA, since there are no validated or accepted uniform criteria to classify such individuals with early disease. 
 The standard and accepted means of deﬁ  ning RA is by use of 
classiﬁ  cation criteria. Classiﬁ  cation criteria enable the stratiﬁ  ca-
tion of groups of individuals into those with and those without 
RA in order to standardise recruitment into clinical trials and related studies, and provide the basis for a common approach to disease deﬁ  nition that can be used to compare across studies and centres. The classiﬁ  cation criteria set that is in widespread international use to deﬁ  ne RA are the 1987 American College of Rheumatology (ACR; formerly the American Rheumatism Association) criteria. 
 24   These criteria are well accepted as provid-
ing the benchmark for disease deﬁ  nition, but have a signiﬁ  cant 
limitation in that they were derived by trying to discriminate 
patients with established RA from those with a combination of other deﬁ  nite rheumatological diagnoses. They are therefore not helpful in achieving the goal of identifying patients who would beneﬁ  t from early effective intervention, as discussed above. 
Indeed, with modern therapies, the goal is to prevent individu-als from reaching the chronic, erosive disease state that is exem-pliﬁ  ed in the 1987 criteria for RA. 
 A joint working group of the ACR and the European League 
Against Rheumatism (EULAR) was therefore formed to develop 
a new approach for classiﬁ  cation of RA. While classiﬁ  cation cri-
teria are potentially adopted for use as aids for diagnosis, the focus of this endeavour was not on developing diagnostic cri-teria or providing a referral tool for primary care physicians. Indeed, a separate body of work is needed to develop such tools, which may be informed by classiﬁ  cation criteria. Thus, the spe-ciﬁ c charge was to develop new classiﬁ  cation criteria for RA to 
facilitate the study of persons at earlier stages of the disease. It was with this framework in mind that the working group devel-oped the 2010 ACR/EULAR classiﬁ  cation criteria for RA. 
  OVERVIEW ON HYPOTHESIS AND METHODS OF 
PHASES 1 AND 2 
 A priori, the working group focused on developing an approach 
that would be appropriate for newly presenting patients with undifferentiated inﬂ  ammatory synovitis, in order to identify that subset of patients who are at sufﬁ  ciently high risk of per-sistent and/or erosive disease—this being the appropriate cur-rent paradigm underlying the disease construct ‘RA’—to be classiﬁ  ed as having RA. It was recognised that such a scheme 
should not be developed using existing criteria sets as the ‘gold standard,’ because of the inherent circularity. The goal set forth was to develop a set of rules to be applied to newly presenting patients with undifferentiated synovitis that would: (1) iden-tify the subset at high risk of chronicity and erosive damage; (2) be used as a basis for initiating disease-modifying therapy; and (3) not exclude the capture of patients later in the disease course. 
 To achieve these goals, the working group devised a three 
phase programme. Phase 1 was a data-driven approach based 
on cohorts of real-world patients with early arthritis, to identify factors and their relative weights, which were associated with the subsequent decision by a physician to start methotrexate treatment. Phase 2 was a consensus-driven, decision science-based approach, informed by the data from Phase 1, to reﬁ  ne 
  Table 1     Summary of Phase 1 results  
 Variable  Comparison  Relative weight† 
Swollen MCP joint Present versus absent 1.5
Swollen PIP joint Present versus absent 1.5
Swollen wrist Present versus absent 1.6
Hand tenderness Present versus absent 1.8
Acute-phase response Lowly abnormal versus normal 1.2
Highly abnormal versus normal 1.7
Serology (RF or ACPA) Low-positive versus negative 2.2
High-positive versus negative 3.9
   †Derived from OR from the multivariate regression model, and interpreted as the 
increase in the odds of having RA with as opposed to without the respective feature (eg, weight of 1.5 for swelling of PIP joints means that the odds of having RA is 1.5-fold in patients with as opposed to patients without swelling of a PIP joint).  ACPA, anti-citrullinated protein antibody; MCP , metacarpophalangeal; PIP , proximal interphalangeal; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; RF , rheumatoid factor.   
03_annrheumdis138461.indd   158103_annrheumdis138461.indd   1581 8/16/2010   5:16:53 PM8/16/2010   5:16:53 PM

Criteria
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1580–1588. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.138461 1582inactive. However, the working group recognised that patients 
may present for the ﬁ  rst time with disease that is at a later stage and being treated. Thus, although it was not the explicit charge of the working group to provide rules for the classiﬁ  cation of 
such patients, it is appropriate to have a single criteria system that could be applied to all patients; these issues were addressed by the expert panel during Phase 3.  
  Determination of the optimal cut point for deﬁ  nite RA 
 Determination of the optimal cut point to classify an individual 
as having deﬁ  nite RA was achieved using two complementary approaches, mirroring the approaches used in the ﬁ  rst two 
phases: data informed and consensus based. From the consen-sus-based approach, the expert panel was asked to examine the rankings of case scenarios based on the new scoring system and to indicate, in their opinion, the point at which the cases changed from ‘probable’ to ‘deﬁ  nite’ RA. Four cases were excluded due to missing domain information (n=2) or ineligibility (two cases were more likely another diagnosis). For the remaining 50 cases, the mean cut point deﬁ  ning deﬁ  nite RA was 65.7 (median 66.1; 
range 60.0–70.3) of a total possible score of 100. 
 A data-driven veriﬁ  cation of that cut point was then 
attempted, in which the new scoring system was applied to 
three of the existing cohorts used for Phase 1 (the Etude et Suivi des Polyarthrites Indifferenciees Recentes dataset from France, the Norwegian dataset and the Rotterdam Early Arthritis Cohort dataset from Rotterdam). 
 25   These cohorts were chosen 
based on the completeness of data and the collected variables, 
enabling calculation of the patients’ probability scores at base-line. The disease characteristics of these cohorts were not sub-stantively different from those of the remaining cohorts (data not shown). probability of developing RA. A 2-day workshop was held in May 2009 in which domains (factors) and categories within those domains that were important in determining the prob-ability of developing RA were identiﬁ  ed. When appropriate, these judgements were informed by the results of Phase 1 and other available literature. The relative importance or weights of these domains and their categories were determined by means of decision science theory and conjoint adaptive tech-nology, using the computerised 1000Minds program (http://www.1000minds.com) in an interactive and iterative process. 
 26   
This analysis permitted the calculation of an individual’s score 
of the likelihood of developing RA from 0 to 100, in which a higher score indicated greater likelihood of RA development. The domains, categories and weights derived during that ini-tial process are shown in  table 2 .    
  OBJECTIVES, METHODS AND RESULTS OF PHASE 3 
  Objectives of Phase 3 
 In Phase 3 the working group integrated the ﬁ  ndings of the ﬁ  rst 
two phases, reﬁ  ned the scoring system, and determined the opti-
mal cut point to deﬁ  ne ‘deﬁ  nite RA’. The goal of this ﬁ  nal phase 
was to utilise the results of Phases 1 and 2 to develop a scoring 
system that would be applicable to newly presenting patients with undifferentiated inﬂ  ammatory arthritis to permit identiﬁ  -
cation of those with a high probability of developing persistent and/or erosive RA. Being intended for use with newly present-ing patients, the scoring system should be robust enough that it could be applied repeatedly during the early course of disease, such that a patient identiﬁ  ed as not classiﬁ  able as having deﬁ  -
nite RA at initial presentation might be classiﬁ  ed as having deﬁ  -
nite RA at a subsequent time point. The work was not aimed at classifying individuals with established disease, either active or   Table 2     Summary of Phase 2 results and subsequent modiﬁ  cations  
  Exact (0−100)  Rescaled (0−10)  Rounded to 0.5 (0−10) 
Joint involvement*
 1 large 0 0 0
 >1−10 large, asymmetric 10.2 1.02 1
 >1−10 large, symmetric 16.1 1.61 1.5
 1−3 small 21.2 2.12 2
 4−10 small 28.8 2.88 3
 >10, including at least 1 small joint 50.8 5.08 5
Serology† Negative RF and negative ACPA 0 0 0
 Low-positive RF or low-positive ACPA 22.0 2.20 2
 High-positive RF or high-positive ACPA 33.9 3.39 3.5
Acute-phase reactants‡ Normal CRP and normal ESR 0 0 0
 Abnormal CRP or abnormal ESR 5.9 0.59 0.5
Duration of symptoms§ <6 weeks 0 0 0
 ≥6 weeks 9.3 0.93 1
   *Joint involvement refers to any swollen or tender joint on examination. Distal interphalangeal joints, ﬁ  rst carpometacarpal joints 
and ﬁ  rst metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints are excluded from assessment. Categories of joint distribution are classiﬁ  ed according to the location and number of the involved joints, with placement into the highest category possible based on the pattern of joint involvement. ‘Large joints’ refers to shoulders, elbows, hips, knees and ankles. ‘Small joints’ refers to the MTP joints, proximal interphalangeal joints, second to ﬁ  fth MTP joints, thumb interphalangeal joints and wrists. ‘Symmetric’ is deﬁ  ned as bilateral involvement of at least one region. In the category ‘>10 joints,’ at least one of the involved joints must be a small joint; the other joints can include any combination of large and additional small joints, as well as other joints not speciﬁ  cally listed elsewhere (eg, temporomandibular, acromioclavicular, sternoclavicular, etc).  †Negative refers to international unit (IU) values that are less than or equal to the upper limit of normal (ULN) for the laboratory and assay; low-positive refers to IU values that are higher than the ULN but three of less times the ULN for the laboratory and assay; high-positive refers to IU values that are more than three times the ULN for the laboratory and assay. When rheumatoid factor (RF) information is only available as positive or negative, a positive result should be scored as low-positive for RF .  ‡Normal/abnormal is determined by local laboratory standards.  §Duration of symptoms refers to patient self-report of the duration of signs or symptoms of synovitis (eg, pain, swelling, tenderness) of joints that are clinically involved at the time of assessment, regardless of treatment status.  ACPA, anti-citrullinated protein antibody; CRP , C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate.   
03_annrheumdis138461.indd   158203_annrheumdis138461.indd   1582 8/16/2010   5:16:54 PM8/16/2010   5:16:54 PM

Criteria
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1580–1588. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.138461 1583(Spearman’s r=0.82, p<0.0001). The correlation of score with the 
proportion of experts who would refer the patient to a trial of a new biological agent with inherent risks was similarly strong (Spearman’s r=0.0.85, p<0.0001).  
 As a further validation, three cohorts that were not used in the 
identiﬁ  cation of factors from Phase 1 were studied (Leiden (The 
Netherlands), Leeds (UK) and Toronto (Canada)); their char-
acteristics were not substantively different from those of the remaining cohorts. 
 25   Among cohort participants who received 
methotrexate within a year from symptom onset, the propor-
tions with a score of 6/10 or greater were 96.8% (Leiden), 90.5% (Leeds) and 87.2% (Toronto).   The area under the curve (AUC) for the three receiver 
operating characteristic curves (which plot sensitivity against 
1—speciﬁ  city for the range of scores) indicated good discrimi-
nation of those who did versus those who did not receive methotrexate (or another DMARD/biological agent) within a year (AUC 0.82 for Norway, 0.66 for France, and AUC 0.69 for Rotterdam; p<0.0001 for all).  The probability scores similarly 
 discriminated between those who fulﬁ  lled the 1987 ACR crite-
ria at 12 months and those who did not (AUC for the receiver operating characteristic curves 0.88 (Norway), 0.67 (France) and 0.72 (Rotterdam)). Visual inspection of the diagnostic test parameters associated with curves that used methotrexate initiation as the outcome showed a maximum slope for both the positive and negative likelihood ratios between a score of 60/100 and 70/100, with ﬂ  attening thereafter (67 in the Norway 
cohort, 66 in the French cohort and 66 in the Rotterdam cohort). The cut point of 60–70 that was derived from expert consensus was therefore supported by these data. Given the consistency with the consensus-based approach, and to maximise sensitiv-ity of the criteria, a cut point of 60 was deemed to be most appropriate.  
  Rationale for the composition and weight of the ﬁ  nal criteria 
 For development of the ﬁ  nal criteria set, the results and weights 
from the comprehensive Phase 2 process  26   were used as a start-
ing point. Based on these categories and weights, we aimed in 
the ﬁ  nal steps of the project to simplify the criteria in order to ensure that they were user friendly. We used the results of the data-driven Phase 1 as a guide for these adaptations, and veriﬁ  ed at each step that the main properties of the criteria 
were not altered and that classiﬁ  cation of patients remained unchanged. 
 The general steps towards simpliﬁ  cation are shown in  table 2 , 
and included rescaling the scoring system to a scale of 0–10. 
Then, each of the category weights was rounded to multiples of 0.5. We tested the rounded scoring system in the case scenarios that had been used in Phase 2, and found no changes in the rank-ing of the cases compared with the exact scale. According to the rescaling, the cut point for deﬁ  nite RA would be 6/10 or greater. 
 Despite their slightly different weights, the categories of 
asymmetric and symmetric oligoarthritis of large joints were 
merged for several reasons: ﬁ  rst, symmetry was not found to be signiﬁ  cantly important in the data analysis during Phase 1, 
 25   
and second, the impact of merging was minimal when all pos-sible presentations of patients with symmetric or asymmetric large joint inﬂ  ammation were explored. For simplicity and ease of use, an integer scale was sought for all components of the scoring system. Thus, the high positive serology category was rounded from 3.5 (originally 3.39) to an integer of 3 because in no instance would classiﬁ  cation status be altered by this change. In addition, the weight for abnormal acute-phase response was rounded from 0.5 (originally 0.59) to 1, based on the stronger weight of acute-phase response (and of high-level acute-phase response) in Phase 1. 
 25    
  Validation of the ﬁ  nal criteria set 
 The ﬁ  nal criteria set with its simpliﬁ  ed scoring system was fur-
ther validated. Using the Phase 2 patient case scenarios, the cor-relation between cases’ mean derived probability scores (0–100) and the proportion of expert panel members who indicated that they would initiate treatment with methotrexate out of concern about risk for persistence and/or erosive damage was strong   Table 3     The 2010 American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism classiﬁ  cation criteria for RA  
 Score
Target population (Who should be tested?): Patients who
 1) have at least 1 joint with deﬁ  nite clinical synovitis (swelling)* 2) with the synovitis not better explained by another disease†Classiﬁ  cation criteria for RA (score-based algorithm: add score of categories A-D;a score of ≥6/10 is needed for classiﬁ  cation of a patient as having deﬁ  nite RA)‡ A. Joint involvement§  1 large joint¶ 0
  2−10 large joints 1
  1−3 small joints (with or without involvement of large joints)** 2
  4−10 small joints (with or without involvement of large joints) 3
  >10 joints (at least 1 small joint)†† 5
 B. Serology (at least 1 test result is needed for classiﬁ  cation)‡‡  Negative RF and negative ACPA 0
  Low-positive RF or low-positive ACPA 2
  High-positive RF or high-positive ACPA 3
 C. Acute-phase reactants (at least 1 test result is needed for classiﬁ  cation)§§  Normal CRP and normal ESR 0 0
  Abnormal CRP or normal ESR 1 1
 D. Duration of symptoms¶¶  <6 weeks 0
  ≥6 weeks 1
   *The criteria are aimed at classiﬁ  cation of newly presenting patients. In addition, 
patients with erosive disease typical of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) with a history compatible with prior fulﬁ  lment of the 2010 criteria should be classiﬁ  ed as having RA. Patients with long-standing disease, including those whose disease is inactive (with or without treatment) who, based on retrospectively available data, have previously fulﬁ  lled the 2010 criteria should be classiﬁ  ed as having RA.  †Differential diagnoses differ in patients with different presentations, but may include conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriatic arthritis and gout. If it is unclear about the relevant differential diagnoses to consider, an expert rheumatologist should be consulted.  ‡Although patients with a score of less than 6/10 are not classiﬁ  able as having RA, their status can be reassessed and the criteria might be fulﬁ  lled cumulatively over time.  § Joint involvement refers to any swollen or tender joint on examination, which may be conﬁ  rmed by imaging evidence of synovitis. Distal interphalangeal joints, ﬁ  rst carpometacarpal joints and ﬁ  rst metatarsophalangeal joints are excluded from assessment. Categories of joint distribution are classiﬁ  ed according to the location and number of involved joints, with placement into the highest category possible based on the pattern of joint involvement.  ¶’Large joints’ refers to shoulders, elbows, hips, knees and ankles.  **’Small joints’ refers to the metacarpophalangeal joints, proximal interphalangeal joints, second to ﬁ  fth metatarsophalangeal joints, thumb interphalangeal joints and wrists.  ††In this category, at least one of the involved joints must be a small joint; the other joints can include any combination of large and additional small joints, as well as other joints not speciﬁ  cally listed elsewhere (eg, temporomandibular, acromioclavicular, sternoclavicular, etc.).  ‡‡Negative refers to international unit (IU) values that are less than or equal to the upper limit of normal (ULN) for the laboratory and assay; low-positive refers to IU values that are higher than the ULN but three of less times the ULN for the laboratory and assay; high-positive refers to IU values that are more than three times the ULN for the laboratory and assay. When rheumatoid factor (RF) information is only available as positive or negative, a positive result should be scored as low-positive for RF .  §§Normal/abnormal is determined by local laboratory standards.  ¶¶Duration of symptoms refers to patient self-report of the duration of signs or symptoms of synovitis (eg, pain, swelling, tenderness) of joints that are clinically involved at the time of assessment, regardless of treatment status.  ACPA, anti-citrullinated protein antibody; CRP , C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate.   
03_annrheumdis138461.indd   158303_annrheumdis138461.indd   1583 8/16/2010   5:16:54 PM8/16/2010   5:16:54 PM

Criteria
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1580–1588. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.138461 1584that incorporates the weights of each domain and the cut point 
of 6 for classiﬁ  cation as deﬁ  nite RA. To classify a patient as hav-ing or not having deﬁ  nite RA, a history of symptom duration, a thorough joint evaluation, and at least one serological test (RF or ACPA) and one acute-phase response measure (erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or C-reactive protein (CRP)) must be obtained. It is acknowledged that an individual patient may meet the deﬁ  nition of RA without requiring that all tests be performed. For example, patients with a sufﬁ  cient number of joints involved and longer duration of symptoms will achieve six points regardless of their serological or acute-phase response status. However, for the purposes of clinical research and trial enrolment, documentation of each domain will be necessary for phenotyping.   
  Other clinical presentations: erosions and late disease 
 Because the aim of the new classiﬁ  cation criteria is to enable 
diagnosis and treatment earlier in the course of disease to pre-vent disease complications, erosions were not considered for inclusion in the scoring system. However, as stated above, the working group recognised that patients may present at later stages of disease. In addition, a single criteria system that could be applied to all patients was desired. Therefore, in addition to those who are newly presenting, three other groups of patients had to be considered: (1) those with erosions typical of RA were deemed to have prima facie evidence of RA and can be classi-ﬁ ed as such; (2) those with longstanding disease, either active 
inactive, who, based on retrospectively available data, can be determined to have previously satisﬁ  ed the classiﬁ  cation criteria   Eligibility for testing with the new criteria 
 The classiﬁ  cation criteria can be applied to any patient or oth-
erwise healthy individual, as long as two mandatory require-ments are met: ﬁ  rst, there must be evidence of currently active 
clinical synovitis (ie, swelling) in at least one joint as determined by an expert assessor ( table 3 ). All joints of a full joint count may be assessed for this purpose with the exception of the dis-tal interphalangeal (DIP) joints, the ﬁ  rst metatarsophalangeal 
(MTP) joint and the ﬁ  rst carpometacarpal (CMC) joint, since 
these joints are typically involved in osteoarthritis. Although currently no methods other than clinical examination should be used to evaluate the presence of synovitis in this determina-tion of eligibility, this may change in the future as validated imaging techniques become more widely available. Second, the criteria may be applied only to those patients in whom the observed synovitis is not better explained by another diagno-sis ( table 3 ). For example, conditions that should be considered and excluded include systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriatic arthritis and gout, among others.     
  Classiﬁ  cation criteria for RA 
 Four additional criteria can then be applied to eligible patients, 
as deﬁ  ned above, to identify those with ‘deﬁ  nite RA’ these are shown in  table 3 . Application of these criteria provides a score of 0–10, with a score of 6 or greater being indicative of the pres-ence of deﬁ  nite RA. This ﬁ  nal scoring system was derived from both Phase 1 and Phase 2 data. A patient with a score below 6 cannot be classiﬁ  ed as having deﬁ  nite RA, but might fulﬁ  l the 
criteria at a later time point.  Figure 1  depicts a tree algorithm 
  Figure 1     Tree algorithm to classify deﬁ  nite rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (green circles) or to exclude its current presence (red circles) among those who 
are eligible to be assessed by the new criteria. APR, acute-phase response. See footnotes to  table 3  for deﬁ  nitions of categories (eg, serology + or 
++, or joint regions).    
03_annrheumdis138461.indd   158403_annrheumdis138461.indd   1584 8/16/2010   5:16:54 PM8/16/2010   5:16:54 PM

Criteria
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1580–1588. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.138461 1585or negative, patients with a positive level should be scored 
as ‘low-level positive’ for RF. When a value for a serological test is not available or the normal range is not available for the reported test value, the result for that test should be considered ‘negative/normal’. Patients should be scored only if information from at least one serological test is available.  
  Deﬁ nition of abnormal acute-phase response 
 The acute-phase response measures CRP or ESR are scored as 
normal or abnormal based on the local laboratory standards. If results of at least one of these two tests are abnormal, the patient should be scored as having an abnormal acute-phase response. If a value for an acute-phase reactant is not available or information on the normal range for the reported test value is not available, the result of that test should be considered ‘negative/normal’. For ESR, a standard approach that considers age and sex differences would be valuable. Patients should be scored only if at least one acute-phase response test is available for scoring.  
  Deﬁ nition of duration of symptoms 
 The ‘duration of symptoms’ domain refers to the patient’s self-
report of the maximum duration of signs or symptoms of syno-vitis (pain, swelling and tenderness) of any joint that is clinically involved at the time of assessment (ie, the day the criteria are applied). Thus, joints that are reported to have been previously symptomatic but are not involved at the time of assessment, whether due to treatment or not, should not be considered in estimating symptom duration.   
  DISCUSSION 
 We present here new classiﬁ  cation criteria for RA, represent-
ing the culmination of an international collaborative effort sup-ported by both a data-driven and a consensus-based approach. This classiﬁ  cation scheme is designed to present a standardised approach to identifying that subset of individuals who pres-ent with an otherwise unexplained inﬂ  ammatory arthritis of a peripheral joint(s), for whom the risk of symptom persistence or structural damage is sufﬁ  cient to be considered for interven-tion with DMARD. This is thus the new proposed paradigm for the entity ‘RA’, importantly, not criteria for ‘early’ RA. If there was an intervention that was both inﬁ  nitely effective and safe and could be provided at no cost and no discomfort, then there would be no requirement for such a subset to be identiﬁ  ed, as 
every patient with inﬂ  ammatory arthritis would be treated. Given that such an intervention does not exist, the search for appropriate classiﬁ  cation rules is justiﬁ  ed, and will also be help-ful in guiding clinical diagnosis. 
 It is important, however, to stress that the criteria are meant 
to be applied only to eligible patients, in whom the presence of 
obvious clinical synovitis in at least one joint is central. They should not be applied to patients with mere arthralgia or to normal individuals. However, once deﬁ  nite clinical synovi-tis has been determined (or historical documentation of such has been obtained), as indicated in the glossary, a more liberal approach is allowed for determining the number and distribu-tion of involved joints, which permits the inclusion of tender or swollen joints. 
 Symmetry is not a feature of the new criteria since it did not 
carry an independent weight in any phase of the work. In prac-
tice, symmetry is difﬁ  cult to operationalise. Inevitably, though, the greater the number of involved joints the higher the likeli-hood of bilateral involvement. can similarly be classiﬁ  ed as having deﬁ  nite RA; and (3) in the setting of early disease that is being treated, individuals may not fulﬁ l the new criteria at initial presentation, but may do so as 
their condition evolves over time.   
  GLOSSARY OF DEFINITIONS 
 In this section, we provide the detailed deﬁ  nitions necessary 
correctly and accurately to apply the new classiﬁ  cation criteria 
for RA. A brief version of the glossary is included in the foot-
notes to  table 3 . 
  Deﬁ nition of an ‘involved’ joint 
 Joint involvement, as used for the determination of the pat-
tern of joint distribution, differs from the deﬁ  nition of synovitis in one joint needed for eligibility in the eligibility criteria (see above): here it refers to any joint with swelling or tenderness on examination that is indicative of active synovitis. Tenderness is included as an equally important feature as swelling for the determination of joint involvement, particularly for the second to ﬁ  fth MTP joints, in order to maximise sensitivity. Again, the DIP joints, the ﬁ  rst MTP joint and the ﬁ  rst CMC joint should not be considered, given their prevalent involvement in osteoarthri-tis. Furthermore, any joints with known recent injury that could contribute to swelling or tenderness should not be considered. Additional evidence of joint activity from other imaging tech-niques (such as MRI or ultrasound) may be used for conﬁ  rma-
tion of the clinical ﬁ  ndings.  
  Deﬁ nition of small joints 
 Small joints include the MTP, proximal interphalangeal, second 
to ﬁ  fth MTP and thumb interphalangeal joints and the wrists. They do not include the ﬁ  rst CMC, ﬁ  rst MTP, or DIP joints, which are often affected by osteoarthritis.  
  Deﬁ nition of large joints 
 The term ‘large joints’ refers to the shoulders, elbows, hips, 
knees and ankles.  
  Determination of the joint pattern category 
 Patients are categorised according to the number and location 
of involved joints by placing them into the category with the highest possible score. For example, a patient with involvement of two large joints and two small joints is placed in the cate-gory ‘one to three small joints’, as this category has the higher score. Patients should be scored for their joint involvement assuming that all of the peripheral joints indicated above have been assessed. For the highest category of joint involvement, in which >10  joints must be involved (including at least one small joint), additional joints that can be considered for inclusion in this count include the temporomandibular joint, sternoclavicular joint, acromioclavicular joint and others that may reasonably be expected to be involved in RA.  
  Deﬁ nition of the serological categories 
 ACPA and IgM-RF levels are usually reported in IU.  Based on the 
upper limit of normal (ULN) for the respective laboratory test 
and assay the following deﬁ  nitions can be made: negative=less 
than or equal to the ULN for the laboratory test and assay; low-level positive = higher than the ULN but ≤ 3 times the ULN for 
the laboratory test and assay; high - level positive=>3  times the 
ULN for the laboratory test and assay. When RF information 
is available only qualitatively or as a level, and thus positive 
03_annrheumdis138461.indd   158503_annrheumdis138461.indd   1585 8/16/2010   5:16:58 PM8/16/2010   5:16:58 PM

Criteria
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1580–1588. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.138461 1586have been developed such that they can be applied to patients 
at more than one time point in the evolution of their symptoms and signs. Thus, a patient who does not fulﬁ  l criteria for deﬁ  nite 
RA at ﬁ  rst presentation might be classiﬁ  ed as having deﬁ  nite RA 
at a subsequent time point. 
 Rather than developing a parallel system for ‘established’ dis-
ease or continuing to use the 1987 criteria for that purpose, the 
working group recommends that, when patient records allow, application of the criteria and assignment as deﬁ  nite RA may be made retrospectively. If there is a history compatible with deﬁ nite RA as deﬁ  ned by these new criteria but no records of 
such, signiﬁ  cant erosive disease seen on radiographs, typical of destructive RA, can be used as prima facie evidence of RA, pre-cluding the need for applying additional criteria. Such individu-als would need to be included as part of the total population of individuals affected by RA. It was not part of the working group’s mission to deﬁ  ne what is meant by signiﬁ  cant erosive 
disease either in terms of the size, site, or number of erosions. Such agreement could be the task for further consensus, although current evidence suggests that such a deﬁ  nition should be highly speciﬁ  c. 
 30   Thus, future work will be needed to deﬁ  ne what evi-
dence of erosions is acceptable to be considered as ‘typical’ of 
RA. This was a similar issue faced with the 1987 ACR criteria, but it did not detract from the usability of those criteria. 
 The use of the new criteria should be limited to a target popu-
lation in whom there is otherwise no explanation (ie, deﬁ  nite 
diagnosis) for their synovitis. The working group has deliber-
ately not provided an exhaustive list of diagnoses or tests that should be performed to exclude these, since that is not the pur-pose of classiﬁ  cation criteria. Differential diagnosis is a physi-cian responsibility and will be inﬂ  uenced by patient age and sex, practice type, as well as variations in the background popula-tion in terms of the incidence of ‘competing’ disorders. Thus, Lyme arthritis may be a frequent cause of synovitis in endemic areas, but testing for  Borrelia burgdorferi  would not be appropriate 
elsewhere. Differential diagnosis is, in this context, inevitably subject to differences in interpretation, as best exempliﬁ  ed by 
the conﬂ  ict between those who would exclude patients with psoriasis from further classiﬁ  cation. In this respect, the impor-tant utility of appropriate exclusion assessment is the avoidance of misclassifying patients as having RA who might otherwise not need to be treated or have self-limiting disease. 
 It was not the charge of the working group to create a referral 
tool for primary care physicians. Indeed, the original 1987 ACR 
criteria were also not designed for such use. Primary care physi-cians and other specialists need an easy-to-use tool to facilitate identiﬁ  cation of individuals who have an inﬂ  ammatory arthritic 
syndrome and for whom referral to a rheumatologist for fur-ther evaluation and diagnosis is appropriate. Support for such an endeavour is already being undertaken as a joint effort by ACR/EULAR and other important stakeholders. 
 One limitation of the new criteria is that they are based on 
current knowledge. Genetic, proteomic, serological, or imaging 
biomarkers that provide a more robust basis for risk stratiﬁ  ca-
tion may emerge, and this would necessarily lead to a modiﬁ  ca-
tion or amendment of the 2010 criteria. Similarly, biomarkers, including imaging modalities, that more robustly identify high-risk subgroups of patients with synovitis may one day be avail-able and validated. A pertinent example of a new biomarker is ACPA (typically, with testing for anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide). Based on a detailed literature review 
 31   and our ana-
lytical approach to physician decision-making, ACPA status did 
not add importantly to the ability to classify an individual as having RA, beyond the information provided by RF when it is  The development of these new criteria was based on diverse 
study cohorts and was performed by RA experts of diverse 
nationalities, enhancing the criteria set’s generalisability. The ﬁ nal criteria also reﬂ  ect consistency in domains of importance 
through the use of two independent methodologies. Previous classiﬁ  cation schemes centered on a pre-identiﬁ  ed clinical con-
cept, typiﬁ  ed by the occurrence of a predominantly symmetric small joint polyarthritis associated with autoantibody produc-tion and a high prevalence of erosions. 
 27   This was the ‘gold 
standard’ used to devise the rules that could be applied in a 
repeatable manner to identify homogeneous groups for obser-vation and study. The new criteria redeﬁ  ne RA, reﬂ  ecting our 
collective hope that in the future, RA will no longer be charac-terised by erosive joint disease and persistence of symptoms, although these characteristics will continue to deﬁ  ne established 
or longstanding untreated disease. This reﬂ  ects several concep-tual issues that are relevant in all areas of research and also in clinical practice. 
 Once the disease entity is redeﬁ  ned, existing epidemiologi-
cal data on prevalence will have less relevance. Generally, this 
should not be a major concern, since there are well recognised difﬁ culties in gathering and interpreting epidemiological data 
regarding the occurrence of RA: prevalence estimates are inﬂ  u-
enced by the effects of therapy and therefore are inherently unstable. The prevalence of RA could variously be described as the proportion of the population who have satisﬁ  ed the new criteria at some relevant point in time. 
 The greater problem is the extrapolation of current literature 
on clinical trials and the design of future trials. The working 
group recommends that clinical trials should henceforth apply these new criteria; however, results from studies using the new criteria cannot necessarily be directly compared with the extensive body of existing work. In reality, in most trials, even of recent-onset RA, subjects with much higher levels of disease activity than is needed for fulﬁ  lment of the new criteria, and often those who have been treated unsuccessfully with multiple previous therapies, are selected. 
 28   Thus, comparison between 
trials will be based much more on the distribution of disease 
activity at entry, for example, than the assumption that crite-ria satisfaction leads to homogeneity in patients recruited. Still, it might be useful, over this transition to the new criteria, for researchers to document the proportions of study subjects who fulﬁ l the previous1987 and the new RA classiﬁ  cation criteria, to 
enable comparisons. 
 There is a potential problem related to the pursuit of basic 
research. For example, genetic association studies have relied 
on a standardised approach to phenotypic assessment based on the 1987 ACR criteria. Such association studies still hold and, as stated above, the new criteria are likely to be easily satisﬁ  ed 
by the participants in such studies. RA is always considered a heterogeneous disorder, and the new criteria scheme will prob-ably increase that heterogeneity. Thus, basic scientists should be aware and, when appropriate, restrict recruitment or stratify results based on clinically meaningful phenotypes. For example, even among patients fulﬁ  lling the 1987 criteria, those who are ACPA positive and those who are ACPA negative have been shown to differ from a pathogenetic, clinical and prognostic perspective. 
 29   
 The criteria have been intentionally derived from paper patient 
cases and cohorts of newly presenting individuals with undif-
ferentiated inﬂ  ammatory synovitis. Once classiﬁ  ed, unless an alternative explanation for the synovitis becomes apparent over time, the individual is labelled as having ‘deﬁ  nite RA’. However, acknowledging that RA is not a static disease, the new criteria 
03_annrheumdis138461.indd   158603_annrheumdis138461.indd   1586 8/16/2010   5:16:58 PM8/16/2010   5:16:58 PM

Criteria
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1580–1588. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.138461 1587Mjaavatten, Valerie Nell, Nathalie Rincheval, Marleen van de Sande and Annette 
van der Helm-van Mil, who were involved in development, data management, or maintenance of their respective datasets used in Phase 1 of the project, and to Rohit Aggarwal, Dinesh Khanna, Katherine Liao, Raj Nair and Sarah Ringold, who were involved in the design or implementation of Phase 2. The authors also wish to thank the ACR and the EULAR for their ﬁ  nancial support of this project. The authors are especially grateful to Amy Miller and Regina Parker from the ACR and Heinz Marchesi and Anja Schönbächler from the EULAR, for their administrative support of the project.  
   Funding   Dr. Aletaha has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or 
honoraria from Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, UCB, Schering-Plough, Wyeth, and Roche (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Bingham has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from UCB, Roche, Genentech, Celgene, and Merck Serono (less than $10,000 each); he has received research and/or educational grant support from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Genentech, UCB, Centocor, Abbott, and Amgen. Dr. Birnbaum has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from Amgen, Pﬁ  zer, Centocor, Abbott, and UCB (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Burmester has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pﬁ  zer, UCB, and Roche (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Bykerk has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from Amgen, Wyeth, Abbott, Schering-Plough, Roche, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and UCB (less than $10,000 each); her spouse is employed by Genzyme and owns stock in the company. Dr. Cohen has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from UCB, Genentech, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Human Genome Sciences (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Combe has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pﬁ  zer, Roche, Schering-Plough, and Merck, Sharpe, and Dohme (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Emery has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from Pﬁ  zer, Abbott, Centocor, UCB, Roche, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Merck, Sharpe, and Dohme (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Ferraccioli holds a patent for T cell receptor clonotype analysis (PCT/IB 2008/053152 NP). Dr. Huizinga has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from Schering-Plough, Bristol-Myers Squibb, UCB, Biotest AG, Wyeth/Pﬁ  zer, Novartis, Roche, Sanoﬁ  -Aventis, Abbott, and Axis-Shield (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Kavanaugh has conducted clinical research for Amgen, Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, UCB, Roche, Centocor, Genentech, and Sanoﬁ  -Aventis. Dr. Kay has received consulting fees from Array BioPharma, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, Centocor, Genentech, Roche, UCB, and Sanoﬁ  -Aventis (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Mease has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from Abbott, Amgen, Biogen Idec, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Centocor, Roche, Genentech, UCB, Pﬁ  zer, Novartis, and Eli Lilly (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Ménard has received unrestricted educational and research grants as well as consulting and speaking fees from Abbott, Amgen, Inova, Merck, Pﬁ  zer, Roche, Schering-Plough, UCB, and Wyeth (less than $10,000 each) and investigator-initiated research grants from Bristol-Myers Squibb, EuroImmun AG, and Roche (more than $10,000 each); he owns stock or stock options in Merck; and he has a license agreement with EuroImmun AG for an anti-Sa enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Dr. Moreland has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from Biogen Idec, Centocor, Pﬁ  zer, Takeda, KaloBios, ChemoCentryx, UCB, Genentech, Incyte, and Eli Lilly (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Naden has received consulting fees from the American College of Rheumatology in regard to the methodology of developing weighted scoring systems (more than $10,000). Dr. Pincus has received consulting fees, speaking fees, and/or honoraria from Amgen, Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Centocor, UCB, Wyeth, and Genentech (less than $10,000 each) and investigator-initiated research grants from Amgen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, UCB, and Centocor. Dr. Stanislawska-Biernat has received speaking fees from Abbott and Pﬁ  zer (less than $10,000 each). Dr. Vencovský has received speaking fees from Pﬁ  zer, UCB, Abbott, Roche, and Merck, Sharpe, and Dohme (less than $10,000 each).  
  Competing interests   None.     Contributors   All authors were involved in drafting the article or revising it critically 
for important intellectual content, and all authors approved the ﬁ  nal version to be published. Dr Silman had full access to all of the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Study conception and design. Aletaha, Neogi, Silman, Felson, Birnbaum, Bykerk, Combe, Costenbader, Dougados, Emery, Hazes, Huizinga, Kay, Kvien, Moreland, Naden, Smolen, Stanislawska-Biernat, Vencovský, Hawker. Acquisition of data. Aletaha, Neogi, Silman, Bingham, Birnbaum, Burmester, Bykerk, Combe, Costenbader, Dougados, Emery, Hazes, Huizinga, Kavanaugh, Kay, Kvien, Laing, Ménard, Naden, Smolen, Stanislawska-Biernat, Tak, Upchurch, Vencovský, Hawker. Analysis and interpretation of data. Aletaha, Neogi, Silman, Funovits, Bingham, Birnbaum, Burmester, Bykerk, Cohen, Combe, Dougados, Emery, Ferraccioli, Hazes, Hobbs, Huizinga, Kay, Laing, Mease, Ménard, Moreland, Naden, Pincus, Smolen, Stanislawska-Biernat, Symmons, Tak, Upchurch, Vencovský, Wolfe, Hawker. .  
  Provenance and peer review   Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.   positive. The working group has therefore included both mark-
ers (ACPA and RF) equally in the criteria. However, as ACPA testing becomes more standardised, further reﬁ  nement may be 
needed. 
 Because there is no gold standard for a diagnosis of RA, the 
cut-off score of 6 or greater is the best estimate from the current 
approaches used; testing in other cohorts will provide further evidence regarding its validity. Since the classiﬁ  cation scheme 
actually provides a continuum of ‘risk for developing persis-tent and/or erosive RA’ (ie, it assigns the risk or probability of developing RA on a continuous score (from 0 to 100%)), there is scope for investigators to use other cut points—or multiple cut points—for different purposes. For example, in a clinical trial of a new potentially toxic agent, a higher, more conservative, cut point might be more appropriate; this is akin to clinical trials enrolling patients who meet criteria but also have evidence of a certain degree of severity or extent of involvement. In contrast, a population study of familial aggregation might use a less restric-tive cut point. As such, there is information derived from scores across the range from 0 to 10 that may be utilised for different purposes in the future. 
 The working group has deliberately labelled these criteria as 
‘classiﬁ  cation criteria’ as opposed to ‘diagnostic criteria’. The 
aim is to provide a standardised approach for discriminating, 
from a population of individuals presenting with undifferenti-ated synovitis, the subgroup with the highest probability of persistent or erosive RA, who may be enrolled into clinical tri-als and other studies through the use of uniform criteria. These individuals are also the ones who may therefore beneﬁ  t from 
DMARD intervention. The criteria do not remove the onus on individual physicians, especially in the face of unusual presen-tations, to reach a diagnostic opinion that might be at variance from the assignment obtained using the criteria. Nonetheless, it is recognised that the new criteria will likely also be used as a diagnostic aid and be required to be satisﬁ  ed, for example, by healthcare providers to enable access to particular interven-tions. However, much like other classiﬁ  cation criteria, clini-cians may be able to diagnose an individual who has not met the classiﬁ  cation criteria deﬁ  nition or who has features that are not a component of the classiﬁ  cation criteria. Diseases often present a much wider spectrum in clinical medicine that can be expected to be captured by classiﬁ  cation criteria, the purpose of which is simply to provide a uniform set of standards by which an individual can be classiﬁ  ed as having a clinical entity or not. 
 The new criteria need to be tested in several clinical situations 
and settings. Physicians need to report particularly if there is an 
important proportion of newly presenting patients who do not satisfy these criteria but for whom there is a compelling reason to treat with a DMARD, or who on follow-up, without a change in their classiﬁ  cation status develop persistent or erosive disease. Validation in three of the cohorts available to us showed that the criteria were satisﬁ  ed in 87–97% of the patients in whom the physicians chose to initiate methotrexate treatment. 
 In summary, the new ACR/EULAR classiﬁ  cation criteria for 
RA present a new approach with a speciﬁ  c emphasis on iden-
tifying patients with a relatively short duration of symptoms who may beneﬁ  t from early institution of DMARD therapy or entry into clinical trials of promising new agents that may halt the development of disease that currently fulﬁ  ls the 1987 ACR criteria.    
   Acknowledgements   The authors are grateful to Celina Alves, Carly Cheng, 
Tracey Farragher, Elisabeth Hensor, Jolanda Luime, Klaus Machold, Maria Dahl 
03_annrheumdis138461.indd   158703_annrheumdis138461.indd   1587 8/16/2010   5:16:58 PM8/16/2010   5:16:58 PM

Criteria
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1580–1588. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.138461 1588   9 .       Rantapää-Dahlqvist   S,      de Jong   BA,     Berglin   E,    et al.    Antibodies against cyclic citrul-
linated peptide and IgA rheumatoid factor predict the development of rheumatoid 
arthritis.    Arthritis Rheum    2003;  48 : 2741 – 9 .  
  10.      Firestein   GS.     Evolving concepts of rheumatoid arthritis.    Nature    2003;  423 : 356 – 61 .  
  11.      Smolen   JS,     Aletaha   D,     Koeller   M,    et al.    New therapies for treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis.    Lancet    2007;  370 : 1861 – 74 .  
  12.      Bohndorf   K,      Schalm   J.     Diagnostic radiography in rheumatoid arthritis: beneﬁ  ts and 
limitations.    Baillieres Clin Rheumatol    1996;  10 : 399 – 407 .  
  13.      Van der Heijde   DM.     Joint erosions and patients with early rheumatoid arthritis.    
Br J Rheumatol    1995;  34  (Suppl 2):  74 – 8 .  
  14.      Plant   MJ,     Jones   PW,     Saklatvala   J,    et al.    Patterns of radiological progression in 
early rheumatoid arthritis: results of an 8 year prospective study.    J Rheumatol   
 1998;  25 : 417 – 26 .  
  15.      Wolfe   F,      Sharp   JT.     Radiographic outcome of recent-onset rheumatoid arthritis: a 
19-year study of radiographic progression.    Arthritis Rheum    1998;  41 : 1571 – 82 .  
  16.      Machold   KP ,     Stamm   TA,     Eberl   GJ,    et al.    Very recent onset arthritis – clinical, 
laboratory, and radiological ﬁ  ndings during the ﬁ  rst year of disease.    J Rheumatol   
 2002;  29 : 2278 – 87 .  
  17.      Bijlsma   JW,     Weinblatt   ME.     Optimal use of methotrexate: the advantages of tight 
control.    Ann Rheum Dis    2007;  66 : 1409 – 10 .  
  18.      Pincus   T,      Yazici   Y ,     Sokka   T,    et al.    Methotrexate as the “anchor drug” for the 
treatment of early rheumatoid arthritis [review].    Clin Exp Rheumatol    2003;  21  
(Suppl 31):  S179 – 85 .  
  19.      Visser   K,      van der Heijde   D.     Optimal dosage and route of administration of 
methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review of the literature.    Ann 
Rheum Dis    2009;  68 : 1094 – 9 .  
  20.      Doan   T,      Massarotti   E.     Rheumatoid arthritis: an overview of new and emerging 
therapies.    J Clin Pharmacol    2005;  45 : 751 – 62 .  
  21.      van der Heide   A,      Jacobs   JW,     Bijlsma   JW,    et al.    The effectiveness of early 
treatment with “second-line” antirheumatic drugs. A randomized, controlled trial.    Ann Intern Med    1996;  124 : 699 – 707 .  
  22.      Bukhari   MA,     Wiles   NJ,     Lunt   M,    et al.    Inﬂ  uence of disease-modifying therapy on 
radiographic outcome in inﬂ  ammatory polyarthritis at ﬁ  ve years: results from a large 
observational inception study.    Arthritis Rheum    2003;  48 : 46 – 53 .  
  23.      van Dongen   H,     van Aken   J,     Lard   LR,    et al.    Efﬁ  cacy of methotrexate treatment in 
patients with probable rheumatoid arthritis: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.    Arthritis Rheum    2007;  56 : 1424 – 32 .  
      24.      Arnett   FC,     Edworthy   SM,     Bloch   DA,    et al.    The American Rheumatism Association 
1987 revised criteria for the classiﬁ  cation of rheumatoid arthritis.    Arthritis Rheum   
 1988;  31 : 315 – 24 .  
  25.      Funovits   J,      Aletaha   D,     Bykerk   V,    et al.    The 2010 American College of Rheumatology/
European League Against Rheumatism classiﬁ  cation criteria for rheumatoid arthritis: methodological report Phase l.    Ann Rheum Dis    2010;  69 :1589–95.   
  26.      Neogi   T,      Aletaha   D,     Silman   AJ,    et al.    The 2010 American College of Rheumatology/
European League Against Rheumatism Classiﬁ  cation Criteria for Rheumatoid Arthritis: Phase 2 methodological report.    Arthritis Rheum    2010;  62 :   2582–91.
  27.      Van der Helm-van Mil   AH,     Detert   J,     le Cessie   S,    et al.    Validation of a prediction 
rule for disease outcome in patients with recent-onset undifferentiated arthritis: moving toward individualized treatment decision-making.    Arthritis Rheum   
 2008;  58 : 2241 – 7 .  
  28.      Hyrich   KL,     Symmons   DP ,     Silman   AJ.     OMERACT 7 Special Interest Group .  
 Reconciling subject differences in recruitment to clinical trials and clinical practice.    
J Rheumatol    2005;  32 : 2475 – 6 .  
  29.      Huizinga   TW,     Amos   CI,     van der Helm-van Mil   AH,    et al.    Reﬁ  ning the complex 
rheumatoid arthritis phenotype based on speciﬁ  city of the HLA-DRB1 shared epitope for antibodies to citrullinated proteins.    Arthritis Rheum    2005;  52 : 3433 – 8 .  
  30.      Thabet   MM,     Huizinga   TW,     van der Heijde   DM,    et al.    The prognostic value of baseline 
erosions in undifferentiated arthritis.    Arthritis Res Ther    2009;  11 : R155 .  
  31.      Aggarwal   R,      Liao   K,     Nair   R,    et al.    Anti-citrullinated peptide antibody assays and 
their role in the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis.    Arthritis Rheum    2009;  61 : 1472 – 83 .       REFERENCES 
   1 .       Scott   DL,     Symmons   DP ,     Coulton   BL,    et al.    Long-term outcome of treating rheumatoid 
arthritis: results after 20 years.    Lancet    1987;  1 : 1108 – 11 .  
   2 .       Mitchell   DM,     Spitz   PW,     Young   DY ,    et al.    Survival, prognosis, and causes of death in 
rheumatoid arthritis.    Arthritis Rheum    1986;  29 : 706 – 14 .  
   3 .       Pincus   T,      Callahan   LF ,     Sale   WG,    et al.    Severe functional declines, work disability, and 
increased mortality in seventy-ﬁ  ve rheumatoid arthritis patients studied over nine years.    Arthritis Rheum    1984;  27 : 864 – 72 .  
   4 .       Isomäki   H.     Long-term outcome of rheumatoid arthritis.    Scand J Rheumatol Suppl   
 1992;  95 : 3 – 8 .  
   5 .       Wolfe   F.      The natural history of rheumatoid arthritis.    J Rheumatol Suppl   
 1996;  44 : 13 – 22 .  
   6 .       Aho   K,      Heliövaara   M,     Maatela   J,    et al.    Rheumatoid factors antedating clinical 
rheumatoid arthritis.    J Rheumatol    1991;  18 : 1282 – 4 .  
   7 .       Aho   K,      von Essen   R,     Kurki   P ,    et al.    Antikeratin antibody and antiperinuclear factor as 
markers for subclinical rheumatoid disease process.    J Rheumatol    1993;  20 : 1278 – 81 .  
   8 .       Nielen   MM,     van Schaardenburg   D,     Reesink   HW,    et al.   Speciﬁ  c autoantibodies pre-
cede the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis: a study of serial measurements in blood donors.    Arthritis Rheum    2004;  50 : 380 – 6 .    Author afﬁ  liations   1 Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria 
  2 Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 
  3 Arthritis Research UK, Chesterﬁ  eld, UK 
  4 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA 
  5 California Paciﬁ  c Medical Center and University of California, San Francisco, 
California, USA 
  6 Charité Hospital, University Medicine Berlin, Free University and Humboldt University 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany    
7 Mount Sinai Hospital and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
  8 National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado, USA 
  9 Lapeyronie Hospital and Montpellier I University, Montpellier, France 
  10 Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA   
11 Cochin Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris and Paris-Descartes 
University, Paris, France   
12 University of Leeds and NIHR Leeds Muscoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit Leeds, 
UK   
13 School of Medicine, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy 
  14 Erasmus Medical Center, University Medical Center Rotterdam and University of 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands   
15 University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, Colorado, USA 
  16 Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands 
  17 University of California, San Diego, California, USA 
  18 UMass Memorial Medical Center and University of Massachusetts Medical 
School,Worcester, Massachusetts, USA   
19 Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway 
  20 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 
  21 Swedish Medical Center and University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 
  22 McGill University Health Centre and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
  23 University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 
  24 Ministry of Health, Auckland, New Zealand 
  25 New York University Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, New York, USA 
  26 Institute of Rheumatology, Warsaw, Poland 
  27 University of Manchester, Manchester, UK 
  28 Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
  29 Institute of Rheumatology, Prague, Czech Republic 
  30 National Data Bank for Rheumatic Diseases and University of Kansas, Wichita, 
Kansas, USA   
31 Women’s College Hospital and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
03_annrheumdis138461.indd   158803_annrheumdis138461.indd   1588 8/16/2010   5:16:58 PM8/16/2010   5:16:58 PM

