 Clinical Practice Guidelines
RICHARD W. WILL Y,  PT , PhD •  LISA T . HOGLUND,  PT , PhD •  CHRISTIAN J. BARTON,  PT , PhD 
LORI A. BOLGLA,  PT , PhD •  DAVID A. SCALZITTI,  PT , PhD •  DAVID S. LOGERSTEDT ,  PT , PhD
ANDREW D. L YNCH,  PT , PhD •  L YNN SNYDER-MACKLER,  PT , ScD, FAPT A •  CHRISTINE M. MCDONOUGH,  PT , PhD
Patellofemoral Pain
Clinical Practice Guidelines Linked to the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health 
From the Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy 
of the American Physical Therapy Association
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2019;49(9):CPG1-CPG95. doi:10.2519/jospt.2019.0302
For author, editor, contributor, and reviewer affiliations, see end of text. ©2019 Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy, American Physical Therapy Association (APT A), 
Inc, and the Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy. The Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy, APT A, Inc and the Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports 
Physical Therapy  consent to reproducing and distributing this guideline for educational purposes. Address correspondence to Brenda Johnson, ICF-Based Clinical 
Practice Guidelines Coordinator, Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy, APT A, Inc, 2920 East Avenue South, Suite 200, La Crosse, WI 54601. E-mail: icf@orthopt.orgSUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS  ........................... CPG2
INTRODUCTION   ...................................................... CPG5
METHODS    .............................................................. CPG5
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES:
Impairment/Function-Based Diagnosis  ...................... CPG10
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES:  
Examination  ........................................................... CPG24
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES:   
Interventions  ..........................................................  CPG34
AUTHOR/REVIEWER AFFILIATIONS AND CONTACTS  .. CPG47
REFERENCES   ........................................................ CPG48
APPENDICES (ONLINE)  ........................................... CPG 58
REVIEWERS: Roy Altman, MD • Paul Beattie, PT , PhD • Amanda Ferland, DPT • Lee Herrington, PhD, MCSP • Sandra Kaplan, PT , PhD
David Killoran, PhD • T om McPoil, PT , PhD • Christopher Powers, PT , PhD, FAPT A • Leslie T orburn, DPT
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg2   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesDIAGNOSIS
AClinicians should use reproduction of retropatellar or peri -
patellar pain during squatting as a diagnostic test for 
patellofemoral pain (PFP). Clinicians should also use perfor -
mance of other functional activities that load the patellofemoral 
joint (PF J) in a flexed position, such as stair climbing or descent, 
as diagnostic tests for PFP .
BClinicians should make the diagnosis of PFP using the fol -
lowing criteria: (1) the presence of retropatellar or peri -
patellar pain, (2) reproduction of retropatellar or peripatellar pain 
with squatting, stair climbing, prolonged sitting, or other func -
tional activities loading the PF J in a flexed position, and (3) exclu -
sion of all other conditions that may cause anterior knee pain, 
including tibiofemoral pathologies.
CClinicians may use the patellar tilt test with the presence 
of hypomobility to support the diagnosis of PFP .
CLASSIFICATION
FGiven the absence of a previously established valid classi -
fication system for PFP , the clinical practice guideline 
group proposes a classification consisting of 4 subcategories as -
sociated with the International Classification of Functioning, Dis -
ability and Health. The proposed classification system is based 
on published evidence. The subcategories are named according 
to predominant impairments previously documented in people 
with PFP . Clinicians may consider using the proposed impair -
ment/function-based PFP classification system to guide patient/
client management.
PFP IMPAIRMENT /FUNCTION-BASED 
CLASSIFICATION SUBCATEGORIES
1. Overuse/ overload without other impairment: a subcategory of 
individuals with PFP may have pain primarily due to overuse/
overload. Classification into the overuse/ overload without other 
impairment subcategory is made with a fair level of certainty 
when the patient presents with a history suggesting an increase 
in magnitude and/ or frequency of PF J loading at a rate that sur -
passes the ability of his or her PF J tissues to recover.
2. Muscle performance deficits: a subcategory of individuals 
with PFP may respond favorably to hip and knee resistance 
exercises. Classification into the muscle performance deficits 
subcategory is made with a fair level of certainty when the 
patient presents with lower extremity muscle performance 
deficits in the hip and quadriceps.
3. Movement coordination deficits: a subcategory of individuals 
with PFP may respond favorably to gait retraining and move -ment re-education interventions leading to improvements in 
lower extremity kinematics and pain, suggesting the impor -
tance of assessing dynamic knee valgus during movement. 
The diagnosis of PFP with movement coordination deficits is 
made with a fair level of certainty when the patient presents 
with excessive or poorly controlled knee valgus during a dy -
namic task, but not necessarily due to weakness of the lower 
extremity musculature.
4. Mobility impairments: a subcategory of individuals with 
PFP may have impairments related to either hypermobile 
or hypomobile structures. The diagnosis of PFP with mobil -
ity deficits is made with a fair level of certainty when the 
patient presents with higher than normal foot mobility and/
or flexibility deficits of 1 or more of the following structures: 
hamstrings, quadriceps, gastrocnemius, soleus, lateral reti -
naculum, or iliotibial band.
EXAMINATION – OUTCOME MEASURES: ACTIVITY 
LIMITATIONS/SELF-REPORT MEASURES
AClinicians should use the Anterior Knee Pain Scale 
(AKPS), the patellofemoral pain and osteoarthritis sub -
scale of the Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score 
(KOOS-PF), or the visual analog scale (VAS) for activity or Eng 
and Pierrynowski Questionnaire (EPQ) to measure pain and func -
tion in patients with PFP . In addition, clinicians should use the 
VAS for worst pain, VAS for usual pain, or the numeric pain-rating 
scale (NPRS) to measure pain. Clinicians should use one of the 
translations and cross-cultural adaptations with demonstrated 
validity, reliability, and responsiveness to change for patients in 
different countries and for those requiring questionnaires in lan -
guages other than English.
EXAMINATION – ACTIVITY LIMITATIONS/
PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE MEASURES
BClinicians should administer appropriate clinical or field 
tests that reproduce pain and assess lower-limb move -
ment coordination, such as squatting, step-downs, and single-leg 
squats. These tests can assess a patient’s baseline status relative 
to pain, function, and disability; global knee function; and chang -
es in status throughout the course of treatment.
EXAMINATION – ACTIVITY LIMITATIONS/
PHYSICAL IMPAIRMENT MEASURES
CWhen evaluating a patient with PFP over an episode of 
care, clinicians may assess body structure and function, 
including measures of patellar provocation, patellar mobility, foot 
position, hip and thigh muscle strength, and muscle length.Summary of Recommendations*
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg3
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesrearfoot-strike runners), cuing to increase running cadence, or 
cuing to reduce peak hip adduction while running for runners 
with PFP .
INTERVENTIONS – BLOOD FLOW RESTRICTION 
TRAINING PLUS HIGH-REPETITION KNEE-
TARGETED EXERCISE THERAPY
FClinicians may use blood flow restriction plus high-repeti -
tion knee exercise therapy, while monitoring for adverse 
events, for those with limiting painful resisted knee extension.
INTERVENTIONS – NEEDLING THERAPIES
AClinicians should not use dry needling for the treatment of 
patients with PFP .
CClinicians may use acupuncture to reduce pain in patients 
with PFP . However, caution should be exercised with this 
recommendation, as the superiority of acupuncture over placebo 
or sham treatments is unknown. This recommendation should 
only be incorporated in settings where acupuncture is within the 
scope of practice of physical therapy.
INTERVENTIONS – MANUAL THERAPY 
AS A STAND-ALONE TREATMENT
AClinicians should not use manual therapy, including lum -
bar, knee, or patellofemoral manipulation/ mobilization, in 
isolation for patients with PFP .
INTERVENTIONS – BIOPHYSICAL AGENTS
BClinicians should not use biophysical agents, including ul -
trasound, cryotherapy, phonophoresis, iontophoresis, 
electrical stimulation, and therapeutic laser, for the treatment of 
patients with PFP .
INTERVENTIONS – PATIENT EDUCATION
FClinicians may include specific patient education on load 
management, body-weight management when appropri -
ate, the importance of adherence to active treatments like exer -
cise therapy, biomechanics that may contribute to relative 
overload of the PF J, the evidence for various treatment options, 
and kinesiophobia. Patient education may improve compliance 
and adherence to active management and self-management 
strategies, and is unlikely to have adverse effects.
INTERVENTIONS – COMBINED INTERVENTIONS
AClinicians should combine physical therapy interventions 
for the treatment of patients with PFP , which results in su -
perior outcomes compared with no treatment, flat shoe inserts, 
or foot orthoses alone in the short and medium term. Exercise 
therapy is the critical component and should be the focus in any INTERVENTIONS – SPECIFIC MODES 
OF EXERCISE THERAPY
AClinicians should include exercise therapy with combined 
hip- and knee-targeted exercises to reduce pain and im -
prove patient-reported outcomes and functional performance in 
the short, medium, and long term. Hip-targeted exercise therapy 
should target the posterolateral hip musculature. Knee-targeted 
exercise therapy includes either weight-bearing (resisted squats) 
or non–weight-bearing (resisted knee extension) exercise, as both 
exercise techniques target the knee musculature. Preference to 
hip-targeted exercise over knee-targeted exercise may be given in 
the early stages of treatment of PFP . Overall, the combination of 
hip- and knee-targeted exercises is preferred over solely knee-tar -
geted exercises to optimize outcomes in patients with PFP .
INTERVENTIONS – PATELLAR TAPING
BClinicians may use tailored patellar taping in combination 
with exercise therapy to assist in immediate pain reduc -
tion, and to enhance outcomes of exercise therapy in the short 
term (4 weeks). Importantly, taping techniques may not be bene -
ficial in the longer term or when added to more intensive physical 
therapy. T aping applied with the aim of enhancing muscle func -
tion is not recommended.
INTERVENTIONS – PATELLOFEMORAL 
KNEE ORTHOSES (BRACING)
BClinicians should not prescribe patellofemoral knee  
orthoses, including braces, sleeves, or straps, for patients 
with PFP .
INTERVENTIONS – FOOT ORTHOSES
AClinicians should prescribe prefabricated foot orthoses 
for patients with greater than normal pronation to reduce 
pain, but only in the short term (up to 6 weeks). If prescribed, 
foot orthoses should be combined with an exercise therapy pro -
gram. There is insufficient evidence to recommend custom foot 
orthoses over prefabricated foot orthoses.
INTERVENTIONS – BIOFEEDBACK
BClinicians should not use electromyography-based bio -
feedback on medial vastii activity to augment knee-target -
ed (quadriceps) exercise therapy for the treatment of PFP .
BClinicians should not use visual biofeedback on lower ex -
tremity alignment during hip- and knee-targeted exercises 
for the treatment of patients with PFP .
INTERVENTIONS – RUNNING GAIT RETRAINING
CClinicians may use gait retraining consisting of multiple 
sessions of cuing to adopt a forefoot-strike pattern (for 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg4   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinescombined intervention approach. Interventions to consider com -
bining with exercise therapy include foot orthoses, patellar taping, 
patellar mobilizations, and lower-limb stretching.*These recommendations and clinical practice guidelines are based on the scientific 
literature accepted for publication prior to May 2018.
List of Abbreviations
ACLR:  anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
ADL:  activity of daily living
AKP:  anterior knee pain
AKPS:  Anterior Knee Pain Scale
AMSTAR:  A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic 
Reviews
APTA:  American Physical Therapy Association
AUC:  area under the curve
BMI:  body mass index
CI: confidence interval
CMP:  chondromalacia patellae
COP:  center of pressure
CPG:  clinical practice guideline
EMG:  electromyography
EPQ:  Eng and Pierrynowski Questionnaire
FIQ:  Functional Index Questionnaire
FPI:  Foot Posture Index
FPPA:  frontal plane projection angle
GROC:  global rating of change
GRS:  Global Rating Scale
ICC:  intraclass correlation coefficient
ICD:  International Classification of Diseases
ICF:  International Classification of Functioning, Disability 
and Health
IKDC:  International Knee Documentation Committee 
2000 Subjective Knee Evaluation Form
ITBS:  iliotibial band syndrome
JOSPT : Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy
KOOS:  Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score
KOOS-PF:  patellofemoral pain and osteoarthritis subscale 
of the Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score
KOS-ADLS:  Knee Outcome Survey-Activities of Daily 
Living Scale
KOS-SAS:  Knee Outcome Survey-Sports Activity Scale
KQoL-26:  Knee Quality of Life 26-item questionnaireLEFS:  Lower Extremity Functional Scale
–LR:  negative likelihood ratio
+LR:  positive likelihood ratio
MCID:  minimal clinically important difference
MDC:  minimal detectable change
MRI:  magnetic resonance imaging
NPRS:  numeric pain-rating scale
OA:  osteoarthritis
OMERACT:  Outcome Measures in Rheumatology
OR:  odds ratio
OSPRO-ROS:  Optimal Screening for Prediction of 
Referral and Outcome-review of systems
OSPRO-YF:  Optimal Screening for Prediction of Referral 
and Outcome-yellow flag assessment tool
PEDro:  Physiotherapy Evidence Database
PFJ:  patellofemoral joint
PFOA:  patellofemoral osteoarthritis
PFP:  patellofemoral pain
PROM:  patient-reported outcome measure
PSS:  Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome Severity Scale
Q angle:  quadriceps angle
RCT:  randomized controlled trial
ROC:  receiver operating characteristic
ROM:  range of motion
SD: standard deviation
SEM:  standard error of measurement
SF-36:  Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form 
Health Survey
SLS:  single-leg squat
SMD:  standardized mean difference
TIPPS:  targeted interventions for patellofemoral pain 
syndrome
VAS:  visual analog scale
WOMAC:  Western Ontario and McMaster Universities 
Osteoarthritis Index
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg5
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesIntroduction 
AIM OF THE GUIDELINES
The Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy of the Ameri -
can Physical Therapy Association (APTA), Inc has an ongo -
ing effort to create evidence-based clinical practice guidelines 
(CPGs) for orthopaedic physical therapy management of pa -
tients with musculoskeletal impairments described in the 
World Health Organization’s International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF).319
The objectives of these clinical guidelines are as follows:
• Describe evidence-based physical therapy practice, includ -
ing diagnosis, prognosis, intervention, and assessment of 
outcome, for musculoskeletal disorders commonly man -
aged by orthopaedic physical therapists
• Classify and define common musculoskeletal conditions 
using the World Health Organization’s terminology related 
to impairments of body function and body structure, activ -
ity limitations, and participation restrictions
• Identify interventions supported by current best evidence 
to address impairments of body function and structure, ac -
tivity limitations, and participation restrictions associated 
with common musculoskeletal conditions
• Identify appropriate outcome measures to assess changes 
resulting from physical therapy interventions in body func -
tion and structure as well as in activity and participation of 
the individual
• Provide a description to policy makers, using internation -
ally accepted terminology, of the practice of orthopaedic 
physical therapists
• Provide information for payers and claims reviewers re -
garding the practice of orthopaedic physical therapy for 
common musculoskeletal conditions
• Create a reference publication for orthopaedic physical 
therapy clinicians, academic instructors, clinical instruc -
tors, students, interns, residents, and fellows regarding the 
best current practice of orthopaedic physical therapySTATEMENT OF INTENT
These guidelines are not intended to be construed or to serve 
as a standard of medical care. Standards of care are deter -
mined on the basis of all clinical data available for an individ -
ual patient and are subject to change as scientific knowledge 
and technology advance and patterns of care evolve. These 
parameters of practice should be considered guidelines only. 
Adherence to them will not ensure a successful outcome in 
every patient, nor should they be construed as including all 
proper methods of care or excluding other acceptable meth -
ods of care aimed at the same results. The ultimate judgment 
regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan 
must be made based on clinician experience and expertise in 
light of the clinical presentation of the patient, the available 
evidence, available diagnostic and treatment options, and the 
patient’s values, expectations, and preferences. However, we 
suggest that significant departures from accepted guidelines 
should be documented in the patient’s medical records at the 
time the relevant clinical decision is made.
SCOPE AND RATIONALE OF THE GUIDELINE
Patellofemoral pain (PFP) is a common musculoskeletal-
related condition that is characterized by insidious onset of 
poorly defined pain, localized to the anterior retropatellar 
and/or peripatellar region of the knee.80 The onset of symp -
toms can be slow or acutely develop with a worsening of pain 
accompanying lower-limb loading activities (eg, squatting, 
prolonged sitting, ascending/descending stairs, jumping, or 
running, especially with hills).154,234,254 Symptoms can restrict 
participation in physical activity, sports, and work.74 Symp -
toms can recur and can persist for years.74 Patients with PFP 
symptoms frequently present to health care professionals for 
diagnosis and treatment.74,277 This CPG will allow physical 
therapists and other rehabilitation specialists to stay up to 
date with evolving PFP knowledge and practices, and help 
them to make evidence-based treatment decisions.166
Content experts were appointed by the Academy of Ortho -
paedic Physical Therapy, APTA, Inc to conduct a review of 
the literature and to develop a PFP CPG as indicated by the 
current state of the evidence in the field. The authors of this 
guideline worked with research librarians with expertise in 
systematic reviews to perform a systematic search. The search 
was for concepts associated with PFP in articles published 
since 1960 related to classification, examination, and inter -vention strategies, consistent with previous guideline devel -
opment methods related to ICF classification.184 Briefly, the 
following databases were searched from 1960 to May 2018: 
MEDLINE (PubMed; 1960 to date), Scopus (Elsevier BV; 
1960 to date), CINAHL (EBSCO; 1960 to date), SPORTDis -
cus (EBSCO; 1960 to date), Cochrane Library (Wiley; 1960 
to date). See APPENDIX A  for full search strategies and APPENDIX B  
for search dates and results, available at www.jospt.org .Methods
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg6   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesThe authors declared relationships and developed a conflict 
management plan, which included submitting a conflict of 
interest form to the Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Thera -
py, APTA, Inc. Articles that were authored by a reviewer were 
assigned to an alternate reviewer. Funding was provided to 
the CPG development team for travel and expenses for CPG 
development training. The CPG development team main -
tained editorial independence.
Articles contributing to recommendations were reviewed 
based on specified inclusion and exclusion criteria, with the 
goal of identifying evidence relevant to physical therapist 
clinical decision making for adult persons with PFP. The title 
and abstract of each article were reviewed independently by 
2 members of the CPG development team for inclusion. See 
APPENDIX C  for inclusion and exclusion criteria, available at 
www.jospt.org . Full-text review was then similarly conducted 
to obtain the final set of articles for contribution to recom -
mendations. The team leader (D.S.L.) provided the final deci -
sion for discrepancies that were not resolved by the review 
team. See APPENDIX D  for a flow chart of articles and APPENDIX E 
for articles included in recommendations by topic, available 
at www.jospt.org . For selected relevant topics that were not 
appropriate to the development of recommendations, such 
as incidence and imaging, articles were not subject to the 
systematic review process and were not included in the flow 
chart. Evidence tables for this CPG are available on the Clini -
cal Practice Guidelines page of the Academy of Orthopaedic 
Physical Therapy, APTA, Inc website ( www.orthopt.org ).
This guideline was issued in 2019 based on the published 
literature up to May 2018. This guideline will be considered 
for review in 2024, or sooner if new evidence becomes avail -
able. Any updates to the guideline in the interim period will 
be noted on the Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy, 
APTA, Inc website ( www.orthopt.org ).
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Individual clinical research articles were graded accord -
ing to criteria adapted from the Centre for Evidence-Based 
Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom for diagnostic, prospec -
tive, and therapeutic studies.229 In 3 teams of 2, each review -
er independently assigned a level of evidence and evaluated 
the quality of each article using a critical appraisal tool. See 
APPENDICES F and G for the evidence table and details on pro -
cedures used for assigning levels of evidence, available at 
www.jospt.org . The evidence update was organized from 
highest level of evidence to lowest level. An abbreviated 
version of the grading system is provided as follows.IEvidence obtained from high-quality diagnostic studies, prospec -
tive studies, randomized controlled trials, or systematic reviews
IIEvidence obtained from lesser-quality diagnostic studies, pro -
spective studies, systematic reviews, or randomized controlled 
trials (eg, weaker diagnostic criteria and reference standards, 
improper randomization, no blinding, less than 80% follow-up)
III Case-control studies or retrospective studies
IV Case series
V Expert opinion
STRENGTH OF EVIDENCE AND GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
The strength of the evidence supporting the recommendations 
was graded according to the previously established methods 
provided below. Each team developed recommendations based 
on the strength of evidence, including how directly the studies 
addressed the question in the PFP population. In developing 
their recommendations, the authors considered the strengths 
and limitations of the body of evidence, and the health ben -
efits, side effects, and risks of tests and interventions.
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION STRENGTH OF EVIDENCE
AStrong evidence A preponderance of level I and/ or level II 
studies support the recommendation. This 
must include at least 1 level I study
BModerate  
evidenceA single high-quality randomized controlled 
trial or a preponderance of level II studies 
support the recommendation
CWeak evidence A single level II study or a preponderance of 
level III and IV studies, including statements 
of consensus by content experts, support the 
recommendation
DConflicting  
evidenceHigher-quality studies conducted on this 
topic disagree with respect to their conclu -
sions. The recommendation is based on 
these conflicting studies
ETheoretical/  
foundational  
evidenceA preponderance of evidence from animal or 
cadaver studies, from conceptual models/
principles, or from basic science/bench 
research supports this recommendation
FExpert opinion Best practice based on the clinical experi -
ence of the guidelines development team 
supports this recommendation
DESCRIPTION OF GUIDELINE VALIDATION
Identified reviewers who are experts in PFP management and 
rehabilitation reviewed this CPG content and methods for in -
tegrity and accuracy and to ensure that they fully represent 
the condition. Any comments, suggestions, or feedback from 
the expert reviewers were delivered to authors and editors to 
consider and make appropriate revisions. These guidelines 
were also posted for public comment and review on the www.Methods (continued)
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg7
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesorthopt.org  website, and a notification of this posting was 
sent to the members of the Academy of Orthopaedic Physical 
Therapy, APTA, Inc. Any comments, suggestions, and feed -
back gathered from public commentary were sent to authors 
and editors to consider and make appropriate revisions in the 
guideline. In addition, a panel of consumer/patient represen -
tatives and external stakeholders, such as claims reviewers, 
medical coding experts, academic educators, clinical educa -
tors, physician specialists, and researchers, also reviewed the 
guideline and provided feedback and recommendations that 
were given to authors and editors for further consideration 
and revisions. Last, a panel of consumer/patient represen -
tatives and external stakeholders and a panel of experts in 
physical therapy practice guideline methodology annually re -
view the Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy, APTA, 
Inc’s ICF-based CPG policies and provide feedback and com -
ments to the Clinical Practice Guidelines Coordinator and 
editors to improve the APTA’s guideline development and 
implementation processes.
DISSEMINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS
In addition to publishing these guidelines in the Journal 
of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy  (JOSPT ), these 
guidelines will be posted on CPG areas of both the JOSPT 
and the Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy, APTA, 
Inc websites, which are free-access website areas, and sub -
mitted to be available for free access on the ECRI Guidelines Trust website ( https://guidelines.ecri.org ). The implemen -
tation tools planned to be available for patients, clinicians, 
educators, payers, policy makers, and researchers, and the 
associated implementation strategies, are listed in TABLE 1 .
CLASSIFICATION
The International Classification of Diseases-10th Revision 
(ICD-10) codes and conditions and the primary ICF body 
functions, structures, and activity and participation codes as -
sociated with PFP are provided below. The ICF codes can be 
accessed at http://apps.who.int/classifications/icfbrowser/ .
PFP With Overuse/Overload Without Other Impairment
ICD-10 codes
Patellofemoral disorders, unspecified knee M22.2X9
Unspecified disorder of patella, unspecified knee M22.90
Chondromalacia patellae, unspecified knee M22.40
Chondromalacia, unspecified knee M94.269
ICF body function codes
Pain in lower limb b28015
Pain in joints b28016
ICF body structure codes
Knee joint s75011
Ligaments and fascia of thigh s75003
ICF activities and participation codes
Squatting d4101Methods (continued)
TABLE 1Planned Strategies and Tools to Support the Dissemination 
and Implementation of This Clinical Practice Guideline
T ool Strategy
JOSPT ’s “Perspectives for Patients” and/ or “Perspectives for Practice” 
articlesPatient-oriented guideline summary available on www.jospt.org
Mobile app of guideline-based exercises for patient/ clients and health care 
practitionersMarketing and distribution of app using www.orthopt.org
Clinician’s Quick-Reference Guide Summary or guideline recommendations available on www.orthopt.org
JOSPT’s Read for CreditSM continuing education units Continuing Education Units available for physical therapists and athletic trainers
Webinars: educational offering for health care practitioners Guideline-based instruction available for practitioners on www.orthopt.org
Mobile and web-based app of guideline for training of health care  
practitionersMarketing and distribution of app using www.orthopt.org
Physical Therapy National Outcomes Data Registry Support the ongoing usage of data registry for common musculoskeletal condi -
tions ( www.ptoutcomes.com )
Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes mapping Publication of minimal data sets and their corresponding Logical Observation 
Identifiers Names and Codes for the knee region on www.orthopt.org
Non-English versions of the guidelines and guideline implementation  
toolsDevelopment and distribution of translated guidelines and tools to JOSPT’s 
international partners and global audience
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg8   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesRunning d4552
Climbing d4551
Maintaining a sitting position d4153
Walking on different surfaces d4502
Jumping d4553
Managing diet and fitness d5701
Sports d9201
PFP With Muscle Performance Deficits
ICD-10 codes
Patellofemoral disorders, unspecified knee M22.2X9
Pain in unspecified knee M25.569
Chronic right knee joint pain M25.561
Chronic left knee joint pain M25.562
Pain in knee M25.56
Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, 
unspecified thighM62.559
Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, 
unspecified lower legM62.569
ICF body function codes
Pain in lower limb b28015
Pain in joints b28016
Power of isolated muscles and muscle groups b7300
Endurance of isolated muscles b7400
ICF body structure codes
Muscles of pelvic region s7402
Muscles of thigh s75002
ICF activities and participation codes
Squatting d4101
Running d4552
Climbing d4551
Maintaining a sitting position d4153
Walking on different surfaces d4502
Jumping d4553
Managing diet and fitness d5701
Sports d9201
PFP With Movement Coordination Deficits
ICD-10 codes
Patellofemoral disorders, unspecified knee M22.2X9
Other biomechanical lesions of lower extremity M99.86
ICF body function codes
Pain in lower limb b28015
Pain in joints b28016
Control of complex voluntary movements b7601
Supportive functions of arm or leg b7603
Gait pattern functions b770ICF body structure codes
Muscles of pelvic region s7402
Muscles of thigh s75002
Muscles of lower leg s75012
ICF activities and participation codes
Squatting d4101
Running d4552
Climbing d4551
Maintaining a sitting position d4153
Walking on different surfaces d4502
Jumping d4553
Managing diet and fitness d5701
Sports d9201
PFP With Mobility Impairments
ICD-10 codes
Patellofemoral disorders, unspecified knee M22.2X9
Contracture, unspecified joint M24.50
Contracture of muscle, unspecified thigh M62.459
Hypertrophy of (infrapatellar) fat pad M79.4
Other specified acquired deformities of unspecified 
lower legM21.869
Other acquired deformities of unspecified foot M21.6X9
ICF body function codes
Pain in lower limb b28015
Pain in joints b28016
Mobility of several joints b7101
Mobility of tarsal bones b7203
Stability of several joints b7151
Stability of joints generalized b7152
ICF body structure codes
Hip joint s75001
Knee joint s75011
Ankle joint and joints of foot and toes s75021
Ligaments and fascia of thigh s75003
Extra-articular ligaments, fasciae, extramuscular  
aponeuroses, retinacula, septa, bursae, 
unspecifieds7703
ICF activities and participation codes
Squatting d4101
Running d4552
Climbing d4551
Maintaining a sitting position d4153
Walking on different surfaces d4502
Jumping d4553
Managing diet and fitness d5701
Sports d9201Methods (continued)
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg9
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesORGANIZATION OF THE GUIDELINE
For each topic of Impairment/Function-Based Diagnosis, 
Examination, and Interventions, a synthesis of the recent lit -
erature, with the corresponding evidence levels, is presented. Each topic concludes with an evidence summary or recom -
mendation and its grade. At the conclusion of the CPG, we 
provide a decision tree model to illustrate clinical decision 
making using the evidence and recommendations.Methods (continued)
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg10   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral pain is not a self-limiting condition.254 Previ -
ously, PFP was considered a condition that is commonplace 
in adolescents and that would eventually resolve over time.225 
However, 50% to 56% of adolescents report persistent knee 
pain 2 years after their initial diagnosis.244,246 This can have a 
substantial impact on quality of life and burden of living with 
PFP, such as loss of physical function, loss of self-identity, 
pain-related confusion and fear, and concern for the future.266
PATHOANATOMICAL FEATURES
The patellofemoral joint (PFJ) comprises the articulation be -
tween the patella and the trochlear groove of the femur. The 
patella is a large sesamoid bone embedded in the quadriceps 
extensor mechanism. The roles of the patella are to increase 
the moment arm of the quadriceps muscles, provide bony 
protection to the distal joint surfaces of the femoral condyles 
when the knee is flexed, and prevent damaging compressive 
forces on the quadriceps tendon with resisted knee extension.
Clinical Presentation
Patellofemoral pain is a common musculoskeletal-related 
condition that is characterized by insidious onset of poorly 
defined pain quality localized to the anterior retropatellar 
and/or peripatellar region of the knee.80 The onset of symp -
toms can be slow or acutely develop, with a worsening of pain 
with lower-limb loading (eg, squatting, prolonged sitting, as -
cending/descending stairs, jumping, or running, especially 
with hills).154,234,254 While many pathoanatomic correlates, 
such as internal derangement or cartilage softening, have 
been offered from as early as 1928,106 all are poorly associated 
with symptoms.94,254,288,291 Therefore, diagnosis is based on a 
cluster of signs and symptoms after ruling out other patho -
anatomic diagnoses.205 Because there is typically a progres -
sive, insidious onset of symptoms, diagnosis is often delayed, 
and describing the typical clinical course is difficult.
Pain
Collins et al61 conducted a retrospective review of 4 separate 
studies on the presence of symptoms in 459 individuals with 
PFP. They found that a large majority of these individuals re -
ported at least some difficulty with squatting (93.7%), stair 
negotiation (91.2%), and running (90.8%).61 People with PFP 
tend to ascend and descend stairs with reduced knee flexion, CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Impairment/Function-Based  
Diagnosis
PREVALENCE AND INCIDENCE
Prevalence ranges from 3% to 85% for idiopathic anterior 
knee pain (AKP) or PFP and its associated diagnoses,41,207,216 
with a prevalence of 25% being the most frequently cited.41 
An analysis of the PearlDiver record database (a large na -
tional database of orthopaedic conditions) reported a preva -
lence of PFP diagnoses between 1.5% and 7.3% of all patients 
seeking medical care.119
Patellofemoral pain occurs across the life span, from young 
children to older sedentary individuals.41 The highest prev -
alence of PFP appears to be observed in those between 12 
and 19 years of age,41,310 but may be dependent on activity 
level and environmental context. However, these percent -
ages are in contrast to the PearlDiver data analysis, which 
reported the highest percentage of PFP diagnosis in the 
50-to-59-year age group.119 The discrepancy in prevalence 
related to age may be due to an environmental context, 
such as treatment in a sports clinic versus in a general 
practice office.119
Varying differences in prevalence by sex have been reported. 
Glaviano et al119 reported that 55% of patients with PFP in 
the PearlDiver database were female. Boling et al32 reported 
a prevalence of 15% in female naval cadets, compared to 12% 
in male naval cadets, at the US Naval Academy, whereas Lak -
stein et al170 reported a prevalence of 2.39% in female Israel 
Defense Force recruits compared to 4.56% in male Israel 
Defense Force recruits. The overall incidence rate for PFP in 
US naval cadets was 22/1000 person-years,32 and in military 
recruits was 0.22/1000 training hours.151 The incidence rate 
for PFP in US naval cadets was greater in women compared 
to men (33/1000 person-years and 15/1000 person-years, 
respectively).32 In adolescent female athletes, the cumula -
tive incidence risk and rate for the development of new uni -
lateral PFP were 9.66 per 100 athletes and 1.09 per 1000 
athletic exposures, respectively.203 Tenforde et al278 reported 
a lifetime prevalence of PFP in high school runners to be 
21% in females and 16% in males. The recurrence of PFP is 
alarmingly high, with reports of 70% to 90% having recur -
rent symptoms.270 Additionally, recent reports indicate that 
more than 50% of individuals diagnosed with PFP will report 
unfavorable outcomes 5 to 8 years following enrollment into 
a clinical trial.174
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg11
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesmon in individuals with PFP in the military. The results of 
the meta-analysis by Lankhorst et al173 suggested that quad -
riceps strength, as measured with a dynamometer, was con -
siderably less when compared to healthy control individuals.
Quadriceps atrophy is also a common finding in individuals 
with PFP, but only when it is evaluated by imaging, not by 
girth or visual assessment.116 Quadriceps atrophy is consistent 
across the vastii musculature (ie, not isolated to the vastus 
medialis oblique musculature).116 Thomeé and colleagues283 
found quadriceps inhibition (inability of the central nervous 
system to fully activate the quadriceps) of roughly 18% when 
assessed with surface electromyography (EMG), suggesting 
that at least some of the loss of quadriceps strength is due 
to inhibited central neural drive. This may be partly due to 
the pain generated from the PFJ through arthrogenic inhi -
bition. With respect to quadriceps atrophy and inhibition, 
it is important to note that all studies listed above included 
individuals with current signs and symptoms of PFP.
Decreased Hip Force Production
People with PFP have weakness of the hip abductors, exten -
sors, and external rotators.194,241,286 Rate of force development 
of the hip abductors and extensors is also reduced in people 
with PFP.214 However, in a systematic review with meta-anal -
ysis, Rathleff et al245 attempted to determine whether isomet -
ric hip strength was a definitive cause or a result of PFP by 
comparing outcomes of 21 cross-sectional and 3 prospective 
studies.245 The authors of the 3 prospective studies reported 
no association between hip strength and the development of 
PFP. The cross-sectional studies indicated small differences 
between people with and without PFP for hip abduction, ex -
tension, external rotation, internal rotation, and adduction. 
There is a strong possibility that hip weakness is a result of 
PFP, and not a direct cause of PFP.245
Biomechanics
Altered biomechanics are commonly observed during func -
tional movements in people with PFP. People with PFP may 
walk, run,89,238 and negotiate stairs87 with reduced knee flexion 
compared to healthy controls, which may represent a com -
pensation pattern. Clinically, patients with PFP often present 
with an increased frontal plane projection angle (FPPA; a 
2-dimensional surrogate for the 3-D measures of hip adduc -
tion, hip internal rotation, knee abduction, and knee external 
rotation) during single-leg squat (SLS)134,307 and during a hop 
landing.134 Athletes who tend to move excessively into great -
er FPPAs during a jump landing are more likely to develop 
PFP.142 Distally, altered foot and ankle biomechanics are not 
consistently observed in people with PFP.240
Pain Sensitization
A systematic review by De Oliveira Silva et al88 examined the and there is some debate as to whether this is consistently seen 
in level walking.72 More than half (54.4%) of people with PFP 
reported pain with prolonged sitting; another 26.4% reported 
pain with sitting after exercise. Only 19.2% of people could sit 
without pain.61 Pain with prolonged sitting had low to moder -
ate diagnostic accuracy in an earlier systematic review.64
A systematic review of reviews concluded that AKP produced 
by functional tasks such as squatting, stair climbing, and sit -
ting with flexed knees is currently the best diagnostic indica -
tor of PFP.222
Sandow and Goodfellow254 found less frequent reports of 
symptoms with functional tasks in their long-term follow-up 
of about 4 years, with 50% of participants reporting PFP on 
a weekly or more frequent basis. Half of the cohort reported 
pain with stair climbing and 39% with sport participation at 
the 4-year follow-up. Although symptoms of PFP may become 
less frequent over time, 94% still reported some degree of PFP, 
either at rest or with other activities such as walking. Pain dur -
ing running was not assessed.254 Sandow and Goodfellow254 
also reported that nearly 50% of their cohort had bilateral PFP.
People with PFP demonstrate some common clinical char -
acteristics. Often, patients report pain with palpation of the 
distal pole or medial aspect of the patella, the medial plica, 
and the medial femoral condyle.113,210 There may be pain with 
grinding or compressing of the patella.
Anthropometrics
Patient characteristics, anthropometrics, and patellofemoral 
alignment are often postulated as important factors in the 
development of PFP. However, a recent systematic review of 
observational studies concluded that age, body mass, height, 
and body mass index (BMI) were not risk factors for the de -
velopment of PFP.173 Specific to lower extremity structure, the 
quadriceps angle (Q angle), assessed either in weight bearing 
or non–weight bearing, was not a risk factor for the develop -
ment of PFP.173,223
Patellofemoral pain is often believed to be related to excessive 
foot pronation; however, to date, only 1 study has shown that 
greater navicular drop was associated with, and predictive of, 
the development of PFP in a military cohort.34 Overall, exces -
sive foot pronation does not appear to be a feature across 
studies examining individuals with PFP.
Decreased Thigh Force Production
Compared with healthy, matched controls, people who devel -
op PFP have weaker quadriceps, as measured by a dynamom -
eter. However, quadriceps weakness has only been found to 
be a risk factor for the development of PFP in military popu -
lations.173 Impaired lower extremity muscle function is com -
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg12   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesIn an exploratory study, Lankhorst et al174 determined that 
female participants and those with a longer duration of 
symptoms (greater than 6 months) were more likely to report 
worse outcomes. In the individuals who received medical ad -
vice from a physician, 68% reported no improvement after 3 
months, and 54% reported no improvement after 12 months.
PFP and Patellofemoral Osteoarthritis
A link between PFP and patellofemoral osteoarthritis 
(PFOA) has been suggested.69,74,140,141,320 Patellofemoral pain 
and PFOA have similar presentations, including location of 
pain, quadriceps and hip muscle weakness, and reported pain 
and difficulty with similar activities (eg, stair climbing and 
prolonged sitting). However, long-term prospective data are 
presently lacking to confirm or refute this link,69,320 with a 
recent consensus statement concluding that insufficient evi -
dence exists to conclusively link a past history of PFP with 
PFOA.293 However, there is retrospective evidence of a rela -
tionship between previous history of PFP and the presence 
of PFOA later in life. Thomas et al282 conducted a systematic 
review examining the link between a history of PFP as an 
adolescent or young adult and subsequent development of 
PFOA. This systematic review included 6 prospective studies, 
follow-ups of 5 case series and 1 randomized controlled trial 
(RCT), and 1 retrospective case-control study. Only the retro -
spective study specifically aimed to examine the link between 
PFP and PFOA later in life.285 The prospective studies were 
of low quality due to small sample size, low follow-up rates, 
inclusion of PFP due to trauma, and lack of control groups. 
The evidence for a link between PFP and development of 
PFOA was limited to 1 retrospective case-control study by 
Utting et al,285 who compared the history of individuals who 
had a patellofemoral arthroplasty for PFOA to those who had 
a unicompartmental tibiofemoral arthroplasty. Those under -
going patellofemoral arthroplasty (n = 118) more frequently 
recalled a history of PFP (22% versus 6%), patellar instability 
(14% versus 1%), and patellar trauma (16% versus 6%) com -
pared to those undergoing unicompartmental tibiofemoral 
arthroplasty (n = 116).
Conchie et al62 conducted a retrospective case-control study 
to determine the prevalence of AKP and patellar dislocation 
in persons undergoing patellofemoral arthroplasty for se -
vere, isolated PFOA (n = 190) compared to persons (n = 445) 
undergoing unicompartmental tibiofemoral arthroplasty 
for severe medial tibiofemoral osteoarthritis (OA). Of these 
groups, 111 (58%) people with PFOA and 234 (53%) people 
in the unicompartmental tibiofemoral arthroplasty control 
group participated. A multivariate binary regression analy -
sis found significantly greater association between adolescent 
AKP and PFOA (odds ratio [OR] = 7.5; 95% CI: 1.51, 36.94). 
Additional significant associations were found for history of 
patellar dislocation (OR = 3.2; 95% CI: 1.25, 8.18), patellar association of pain sensitization in patients with PFP (n = 
315). They reviewed 9 studies that included 315 participants 
with PFP and 164 healthy controls. They reported that in 5 
studies, patients with PFP were more sensitized (lower pres -
sure pain thresholds) to a local pressure stimulus (standard -
ized mean difference [SMD], –1.12; 95% confidence interval 
[CI]: –1.48, –0.75) and a stimulus at a remote location (SMD, 
–0.93; 95% CI: –1.19, –0.67) compared to healthy controls. 
However, patients with PFP were no more sensitive to heat 
or cold compared to healthy controls.
Rate of Recurrence of PFP
Based on the results of a few longitudinal studies, PFP is as -
sociated with a high rate of chronicity, even after nonsurgical 
care. Sandow and Goodfellow254 followed 54 adolescent girls 
for 2 to 8 years after diagnosis of PFP. At an average of about 
4 years after diagnosis, 94% were still experiencing some 
form of pain, with less than half (46%) having a decrease 
in pain severity. Nimon and colleagues211 followed this same 
cohort via questionnaires for 14 to 20 years. At the long-term 
follow-up, only 22% had no pain, but 71% had less pain than 
at initial presentation. From the individuals who completed 
the questionnaires at both 2 to 8 years and 14 to 20 years, the 
authors concluded that there are likely to be improvements in 
50% of cases within the first 4 years, and an additional 23% 
in the next 12; however, they were not able to predict who 
would not improve.211
Blond and Hansen29 reported an average of 6-year follow-up 
of 250 athletes diagnosed with PFP who were prescribed a 
self-training program for the lower extremity. About a quar -
ter (27%) of athletes experienced complete pain relief, and an 
additional 38% had decreased pain, leaving 35% with pain 
that was either unchanged or worse.
Kannus and Niittymäki154 attempted to identify predictors 
of people who would benefit from nonsurgical treatment of 
PFP. Of the 49 patients treated with avoidance of aggravating 
activity, quadriceps isometric exercises, stretching exercises, 
and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, 36 (73%) experi -
enced resolution of symptoms.152 Only being younger was 
predictive of improving pain, Lysholm scores, and activity.154 
Overall, these results indicate that attempts to improve the 
function of the quadriceps and remove aggravating factors 
are likely beneficial in the treatment of PFP.152 At a 7-year 
follow-up of these same individuals, there were few changes 
in patient-reported and performance-based functions (quad -
riceps strength, squatting, hopping, duck walking); however, 
physical signs of pain with patellar compression, Clarke’s test, 
and crepitus during patellar compression increased from 6 
months to 7 years.153 Finally, about a quarter of individuals 
developed symptoms in the contralateral knee during the 
7-year follow-up.153
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg13
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesIIBoling et al32 reported that female US Navy cadets 
were 2.23 times (95% CI: 1.19, 4.20) more likely to 
develop PFP compared with male US Navy cadets.
IIHall et al129 conducted a retrospective cohort study 
on the relationship between sports specialization 
and the risk of developing PFP in young female ath -
letes. An overall PFP incidence of 28% was reported in 546 
female adolescent basketball, soccer, and volleyball players 
consisting of 357 multisport and 189 single-sport athletes. 
Participation in a single sport (basketball, soccer, or volley -
ball) was associated with a greater incidence of cumulative 
PFP disorders (incidence rate ratio = 1.5; 95% CI: 1.0, 2.2) 
compared to participation in multiple sports.
IVvan Middelkoop et al294 investigated differences in 
characteristics between adolescents (n = 20) and 
adults (n = 44) with PFP. At baseline, adolescents 
with lower BMI had greater quadriceps strength and report -
ed more bilateral PFP symptoms compared to adults. Both 
groups had similar hip strength and reported similar levels 
of pain at rest and during activity and self-reported knee 
function. At 1-year follow-up, adolescents and adults had 
similar levels of pain, self-reported knee function, and medi -
cal consumption. Only 25% of adolescents and 23% of adults 
reported functional recovery at 1 year.
Local Factors
ISeven prospective studies were included in a sys -
tematic review by Pappas and Wong-Tom.223 Low 
knee extension isometric strength was predictive 
of the development of PFP according to a meta-analysis 
from 2 studies. The Q angle, static knee valgus, and dy -
namic measures of knee valgus were not predictive of PFP. 
An additional cross-sectional study that was not reported 
in the systematic review also reported no association be -
tween Q angle and peak knee abduction moment in healthy 
runners with PFP.224
IIA prospective study of college-aged physical educa -
tion students found an association of decreased 
quadriceps flexibility, shorter reflex response time 
of the vastus medialis oblique muscle, reduction of vertical 
jump height, and higher than normal medial patellar mobil -
ity with occurrence of PFP.313
IIIA literature review suggests that weakness in func -
tional testing was coincident with tightness of the 
hamstring muscles, quadriceps muscles, and ilio -
tibial band with AKP conditions (which included tendinopa -
thies).298 No coincident relationship was reported between 
patellar mobility and PFP in the articles retrieved in their 
search.instability (OR = 3.5; 95% CI: 1.62, 7.42), and previous sur -
gery (adjusted OR = 3.5; 95% CI: 1.75, 7.14).
Hinman and colleagues137 compared the presence of radio -
graphic PFOA and tibiofemoral OA in 224 individuals who 
had chronic PFP who were older than 40 years of age. Isolated 
PFOA was present in 25% of the sample, combined PFOA and 
tibiofemoral OA was present in 44%, and isolated tibiofemo -
ral OA was present in only 1% of the sample. Only 30% of this 
sample with chronic PFP had no evidence of radiographic OA.137
Schiphof et al255 examined 1518 knees of women over 45 years 
of age that had either no OA or only early signs of OA of the 
PFJ. Cartilage defects were present in 15% of these PFJs, 25% 
had osteophytes, 13% had cysts, and 19% had bone marrow 
lesions. A history of PFP (25% of the sample) was associated 
with current cartilage lesions, cartilage cysts, and bone mar -
row lesions.255
Summary
Patellofemoral pain has a variable clinical presentation but 
is generally associated with AKP exacerbations when loading 
the PFJ in squatting, participation in sports, stair negotiation, 
prolonged sitting, and walking. Decreased knee extensor and 
hip musculature strength is associated with PFP compared 
to those without PFP. The most frequently cited predictors 
of poor outcomes are longer duration of symptoms before 
intervention, overall poorer function, and worse pain. Nega -
tive psychological stress and altered pain sensitization were 
present in patients with PFP. For the majority of patients, 
the “educate and wait” approach of avoiding pain-provoking 
activities is not effective in improving pain and function in 
the short, medium, or long term. It appears that PFP and 
PFOA may be related; however, there is insufficient evidence 
to directly state a cause-and-effect relationship.
RISK FACTORS
The etiology of PFP is poorly understood and considered to 
be multifactorial. Frequently, development and persistence of 
symptoms are attributed to proximal, distal, or local factors 
that increase or alter load/stress to the PFJ, and there is a 
large body of research in this area. More recently, nonphysical 
influences on symptoms have been explored, with emerging 
evidence that factors such as pain sensitization and psycho -
logical state may play roles in PFP.
Demographics
IA systematic review with a meta-analysis of 7 pro -
spective studies reported on anthropometrics and 
the development of PFP.223 In 6 studies with 905 
healthy controls and 177 people with PFP, height, weight, and 
percentage body fat were not predictive of PFP.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg14   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesMuscle Strength
IIGiles et al116 performed a systematic review of 10 
studies (2 RCTs, 8 cross-sectional studies) with 
meta-analysis of 7 studies on quadriceps muscle 
size. For quadriceps girth measurements, the SMD between 
the limb with PFP and the control limb was –0.084 (95% CI: 
–0.44, 0.27), indicating no differences. For imaging measure -
ments of quadriceps muscle size, the SMD was –0.44 (95% 
CI: –0.86, –0.029), indicating quadriceps atrophy in the limb 
with PFP.
IIVan Tiggelen et al295 investigated the role of muscle 
strength as a predisposing factor in the develop -
ment of PFP. Thirty-one out of 96 male military 
recruits developed PFP after a strenuous military training 
program (8-12 h/d for 6 weeks). Recruits who developed PFP 
were shorter in height or had lower knee extensor strength 
compared to those who did not develop PFP.
IIIIn a case-control study, 25 women with PFP and 25 
asymptomatic women with PFP had between 11.1% 
and 30.7% inferior knee extensor, hip extensor, hip 
abductor, and hip external rotator strength compared to as -
ymptomatic women. Women with PFP had greater center-of-
pressure (COP) displacement and velocity during a step-up 
and step-down task compared to the asymptomatic 
women.85
IIIGuney et al124 investigated the quadriceps-to-ham -
strings strength ratio in 44 women with unilateral 
PFP (using the contralateral limb as the control). 
At 60°/s and 180°/s for the concentric quadriceps-to-con -
centric hamstrings ratio, the limb with PFP had mean ± SD 
ratios of 1.18 ± 0.21 and 1.02 ± 0.44, respectively, and the 
control limb had ratios of 1.36 ± 0.57 and 1.35 ± 0.32, re -
spectively. At 60°/s and 180°/s for the eccentric quadriceps-
to-concentric hamstrings ratio, the limb with PFP had 
ratios of 1.19 ± 0.23 and 2.56 ± 0.49, respectively, and the 
control limb had ratios of 1.55 ± 0.59 and 2.86 ± 0.91, 
respectively.
IIIA cross-sectional analysis of an RCT was performed 
to identify characteristics of men and women who 
responded to a 6-week hip- or knee-based rehabili -
tation program. Improvement was defined by either a mini -
mum of a 2-cm reduction on a visual analog scale (VAS) for 
pain or at least an 8-point improvement in function on the 
Anterior Knee Pain Scale (AKPS). Men and women improved 
after completing both the hip- and the knee-based exercise 
programs. Those who responded to either exercise program 
had lower baseline hip and knee muscle strength compared 
to the nonresponders.31IIIHoglund et al139 compared isometric hip strength 
in 36 men with and 36 men without PFP. Men with 
PFP had weaker hip extensors, but there were no 
differences between groups in hip abductor or external rota -
tor strength.
Patellofemoral Characteristics
IIICarlson et al44 used magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) to investigate the distance between the tibial 
tubercle and the femoral trochlear groove in a co -
hort of 50 knees (38 participants) with PFP and 60 (56 par -
ticipants) asymptomatic knees. The distance between the 
tibial tubercle and the trochlear groove in fully extended 
knees for participants with PFP was a mean ± SD of 13.0 ± 
3.6 mm, compared to 10.8 ± 3.0 mm for asymptomatic con -
trols. Thirty percent of participants with PFP had distances 
between the tibial tubercle and the trochlear groove greater 
than 15 mm, compared to 5% of asymptomatic controls.
IIIAysin et al12 used MRI to investigate the trochlear 
sulcus angle, the trochlear sulcus depth, a ratio of 
patellar tendon length to the longest diagonal di -
ameter of the patella (Insall-Salvati ratio), and lateral patel -
lofemoral angle in 38 people with PFP and chondromalacia 
patellae (CMP) diagnosed by imaging. Although those with 
more advanced CMP reported higher pain severity and lower 
knee function compared to those with early CMP, there were 
no differences in MRI measures.
Proximal Factors
ITrunk and hip mechanics and impairments have 
been implicated as factors in the development and 
persistence of PFP. Based on 3 high-quality pro -
spective studies included in the systematic review by Rathleff 
et al,245 there is moderate to strong evidence that no associa -
tion exists between lower isometric strength of the hip abduc -
tors, extensors, external rotators, or internal rotators and the 
risk of developing PFP. In contrast, the results of multiple (n 
= 21) cross-sectional studies from this same systematic re -
view provide moderate to strong evidence that individuals 
with PFP have lower isometric strength of the hip 
musculature.245
IIAmong studies that have exclusively looked at run -
ners, the contribution of hip weakness is not clear. 
One systematic review of 2 cross-sectional studies 
and 1 prospective study found conflicting results for the rela -
tionship between hip abductor weakness and the presence of 
PFP.199 A different systematic review of cross-sectional and 
case-control studies reported a reduction in duration of glu -
teus medius activation, measured using EMG signal inten -
sity, in runners with PFP.264 A prospective cohort study 
reported a lower risk for development of PFP in runners with 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg15
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelineshigher eccentric hip abductor strength.243 This study, how -
ever, was limited by a large number of participants who did 
not complete the follow-up. Another prospective study found 
that high school runners with the weakest hip abductor 
strength had a higher incidence of PFP.185
IIAn earlier meta-analysis of 10 cross-sectional stud -
ies by Van Cant et al286 reported deficits in isometric 
hip abduction, extension, external rotation, and 
flexion in people with PFP compared to healthy participants. 
Among studies that used the unaffected side for comparison, 
2 studies reported deficits in hip abduction and 1 study re -
ported deficits in hip extension and hip external rotation for 
the side with PFP.
IIIIn a cross-sectional study, Nunes et al214 compared 
the rate of force development and isometric 
strength of the hip abductor and extensor muscle 
groups in 54 (27 with PFP, 27 healthy) physically active wom -
en. The rate of force development was assessed for time to 
reach 30%, 60%, and 90% of peak isometric torque. Women 
with PFP had 10% weaker hip abductors (effect size, 0.61) 
and 15% weaker hip extensors (effect size, 0.76) than knee-
healthy women. Their rate of force development for hip ab -
ductors was moderately slower than knee-healthy women for 
the time to reach 60% (effect size, 0.50) and 90% (effect size, 
0.59) of peak isometric torque. The rate of force development 
for the hip extensors in women with PFP was markedly slow -
er in the time to reach 30% (effect size, 0.97) and 60% (effect 
size, 0.81) of peak isometric torque.
IIIMcMoreland et al191 examined hip isometric 
strength and hip concentric muscle endurance in 
young women with mild PFP (n = 12) compared to 
age- and sex-matched controls (n = 12). They reported no 
differences in peak torque (isometric strength) and total work 
(endurance) for the hip abductors, external rotators, and in -
ternal rotators.
IIIA case-control study by Van Cant et al287 evaluated 
muscle endurance of the hip abductors, trunk ex -
tensors, and ankle plantar flexors in women with 
PFP (n = 20) compared to healthy controls (n = 76). Women 
with PFP had 16% weaker hip abductors, 14% weaker trunk 
extensors, and 26% weaker ankle plantar flexors compared 
to knee-healthy women.
IIISteinberg et al271 identified factors associated with 
PFP in youth dancers. Dancers aged 10 to 11 years 
with PFP were more likely to have less hip abduc -
tion range of motion (ROM) (OR = 0.91; 95% CI: 0.83, 0.99) 
and less low back and hamstring flexibility (OR = 3.54; 95% 
CI: 1.02, 12.28). In dancers aged 12 to 14 years, those with PFP were more likely to have less ankle dorsiflexion ROM 
(OR = 0.89; 95% CI: 0.81, 0.99), less hindfoot varum (OR = 
0.26), and greater patellar mobility (OR = 2.67; 95% CI: 1.14, 
6.35). In dancers aged 15 to 16 years, those with PFP were 
more likely to have scoliosis (OR = 5.21; 95% CI: 1.35, 20.05) 
and greater ankle plantar flexion and hip internal rotation 
ROM (OR = 1.06; 95% CI: 1.02, 1.1).
Distal Factors
IILankhorst et al172 performed a systematic review of 
7 case-control or cross-sectional studies of static foot 
measures. Arch height index was not associated with 
PFP. The numbers of people with PFP with pes cavus or pes 
planus were not different from knee-healthy controls.
IIThe systematic review of 24 studies (3 prospective 
cohorts, 17 case-controls, and 4 case series) by 
Waryasz and McDermott298 reported no association 
between foot alignment (pes cavus or pes planus) and PFP. 
Gastrocnemius tightness was reported in patients with PFP 
compared to controls in 2 of 3 studies.
IIA systematic review of 24 case-control studies by 
Barton et al20 reported that slower rate of time to 
peak rearfoot eversion and a greater amount of 
rearfoot eversion at initial heel contact during walking were 
characteristic of patients with PFP. Patients with PFP exhib -
ited less rearfoot eversion motion during running.
IINeal et al207 performed a systematic review of 4 
studies investigating foot posture as a risk factor for 
the development of PFP. Navicular drop, measured 
as a continuous variable, was a risk factor for developing PFP 
(SMD, 0.33; 95% CI: 0.02, 0.65). When navicular drop was 
characterized as a dichotomous variable, pooled data indi -
cated no relationship between pronated foot posture and an 
increased risk of the development of PFP. However, measures 
of foot mobility can discriminate between those with PFP and 
knee-healthy controls.16,33,193
IIA systematic review found limited evidence from 3 
studies for plantar loading (ie, plantar pressure) as 
a risk factor for PFP.92 Greater lateral COP dis -
placement and lower maximal displacement velocity of me -
diolateral COP during midstance of walking were 
demonstrated in people who developed PFP. During running, 
higher rates of time to peak force in the lateral heel and peak 
force in the central metatarsal regions were demonstrated in 
people who developed PFP.
IIITan et al276 reported that people aged 40 to 50 years 
with PFP had less foot mobility than people aged 18 
to 29 years and aged 30 to 39 years who also had PFP.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg16   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesety, fear avoidance, AKPS scores, Functional Index Question -
naire (FIQ) scores, quadriceps cross-sectional area, and 
gastrocnemius muscle length. The authors also reported that 
there is strong evidence that pain coping skills and kinesio -
phobia are not predictive of PFP or patellofemoral symptoms 
and function. Baseline pain intensity is not predictive of pain 
at follow-up, and baseline activity-related pain is not predic -
tive of function at follow-up. There is moderate evidence that 
the triple jump test; muscle length of the quadriceps, ham -
strings, or soleus; and activities of daily living (ADLs) are not 
predictive of pain or function. Bilateral symptoms and the 
step test are not predictive of pain. There was limited evi -
dence that BMI, anxiety, being an athlete, and movement 
quality were not predictive of pain or function. There was 
also limited evidence that gastrocnemius muscle length, de -
pression, working status, and the single-leg jump test did not 
predict pain. In addition, there is limited evidence that fear 
avoidance at work, muscle recruitment, work type, and pre -
ferred treatment were not predictive of function.
IIn a follow-up study of 2 RCTs at 5 to 8 years, 57% 
of participants reported unfavorable outcomes, but 
there was a minimal presence of knee OA.57,173 Simi -
lar to previous studies, those with a longer duration of symp -
toms and poorer function were more likely to have worse 
outcomes at long-term follow-up.174
IAn RCT was conducted to investigate the effects of 
prefabricated foot orthoses, flat inserts, and physi -
cal therapy on individuals with PFP.57 Individuals 
treated with physical therapy, prefabricated foot orthoses, or 
a combination of both demonstrated improvement in at least 
85% of cases at 6 weeks and at least 80% of cases at 52 weeks. 
Longer duration of symptoms and poorer function, as mea -
sured by the AKPS, were most often associated with poor 
outcomes.57
IIA systematic review was performed by Matthews et 
al189 to determine which factors could predict out -
comes in patients with PFP. Longer duration of 
knee pain (greater than 4 months), older age, higher baseline 
pain severity, and lower patient-reported function on the 
AKPS were predictive of unsuccessful outcomes for pain and 
function.
IICollins et al59 described the proportions of individu -
als with poor outcomes at 3 and 12 months after 
randomization in 2 different clinical trials with a 
total of 310 patients. More than half (55%) of individuals re -
ported an unfavorable outcome at 3 months, and 40% re -
ported an unfavorable outcome at 12 months. Individuals 
with a duration of pain greater than 2 months from random -
ization, worse resting or activity-related pain, and poorer Summary
Physically active women were more likely to develop PFP 
compared to physically active men. Participation by women 
in a single sport as opposed to participation by women in 
multiple sports was associated with a higher incidence of 
PFP. Isometric knee extensor weakness was predictive of the 
development of PFP. Women with PFP may have lower knee 
extensor, hip extensor, hip abductor, and hip external rotator 
strength than women without PFP.
In studies of men and women, weakness in isometric muscle 
strength of the hip and knee and decreased flexibility of the 
quadriceps, hamstrings, and gastrocnemius muscles may be 
present in people with PFP.
Inconclusive and conflicting evidence exists on the relation -
ship between altered foot mechanics and the development 
or presence of PFP.
Psychological Factors
IIA systematic review by Maclachlan et al186 exam -
ined the association of psychological factors in pa -
tients with PFP. They reviewed 25 studies that 
included 1357 participants with PFP (66% female) and 349 
healthy controls (48% female), with subgroupings based on 
4 psychological constructs: mental health, cognitive factors, 
behavioral factors, and other psychological factors. They re -
ported that mental health (anxiety, depression), cognitive 
factors (pain catastrophizing), and behavioral factors (fear of 
movement) may be elevated in participants with PFP, and are 
likely associated with higher pain and lower function. A sub -
sequent cross-sectional study by the same authors187 com -
pared psychological profiles between 100 participants with 
PFP and 50 controls who were matched for age, sex, and ac -
tivity levels. This study also included a preplanned subgroup 
analysis according to the severity of PFP (based on the Knee 
injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score [KOOS]). No dif -
ferences were seen between the PFP and pain-free groups for 
anxiety, depression, catastrophizing, and kinesiophobia. 
However, those with more severe PFP demonstrated higher 
levels of depression and catastrophizing compared to the 
controls, and higher levels of kinesiophobia, depression, and 
catastrophizing compared to the less severe PFP subgroup.
Prognostic Factors
IPanken et al219 performed a systematic review to 
determine which clinical factors were able to pre -
dict pain, function, or recovery in patients with 
PFP. They reported limited evidence for several factors as 
predictors of pain: frequency of pain, pain catastrophizing, 
fear avoidance, AKPS scores, quadriceps cross-sectional area, 
and muscle recruitment. There was limited evidence for the 
following predictors of function: pain catastrophizing, anxi -
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg17
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinestion of AKP during squatting is the diagnostic test reported 
to have the best sensitivity (in the absence of pain) and di -
agnostic accuracy.64,215,222 The patellar tilt test is a nonpro -
vocative test for PFP, with reduced mobility (positive test) 
prompting a moderate change in the likelihood of PFP be -
ing present.215
Gaps in Knowledge
Additional research is needed to determine the best reference 
standard to be utilized for studies of diagnostic test accuracy 
using individual or a combination of tests.64,215
Recommendations
AClinicians should use reproduction of retropatellar 
or peripatellar pain during squatting as a diagnostic 
test for PFP.64,215,222 Clinicians should also use per -
formance of other functional activities that load the PFJ in a 
flexed position, such as stair climbing or descent, as diagnos -
tic tests for PFP.64,215,222
BClinicians should make the diagnosis of PFP using 
the following criteria:
1. The presence of retropatellar or peripatellar pain64,215,222
 AND
2. Reproduction of retropatellar or peripatellar pain with 
squatting, stair climbing, prolonged sitting, or other func -
tional activities loading the PFJ in a flexed position64,215,222
 AND
3. Exclusion of all other conditions that may cause AKP, in -
cluding tibiofemoral pathologies64,215,222
CClinicians may use the patellar tilt test with the 
presence of hypomobility to support the diagnosis 
of PFP.215
CLASSIFICATION
Multiple biomechanical and neuromusculoskeletal factors 
related to the knee, hip, ankle, and trunk/pelvis have been 
reported to be associated with PFP.19,20,172,206,241,286 Similar to 
low back pain, clinicians recognize that PFP is not a homo -
geneous condition, and response to intervention varies.18,311 
As a result, several classification systems with subcategories 
of PFP have been proposed for nonsurgical management of 
patients. Many of these classification systems are based on 
proposed pathoanatomical diagnoses, which rely on diagnos -
tic imaging or surgical findings.108,144,148,195,256,306,315 These clas -
sification systems are of limited utility for physical therapists 
because they do not include clear diagnostic criteria for each 
subcategory, or they rely on imaging or surgical findings that 
may not always be available to the physical therapist at the 
initial encounter.function, as measured by the AKPS, were more likely to have 
an unfavorable recovery.59
Summary
Individuals with a longer duration of symptoms, higher base -
line pain severity, and poorer function were more likely to 
have negative outcomes or unfavorable recovery.
DIAGNOSIS
ISystematic reviews of diagnostic tests for PFP 
demonstrate that the majority of clinical tests have 
poor diagnostic accuracy.64,215 Clusters of diagnos -
tic tests were found to be no more accurate than individual 
tests.215 A high-quality systematic review reported that the 
most accurate diagnostic tests were reproduction of retro -
patellar pain during squatting (positive likelihood ratio 
[+LR] = 1.8; 95% CI: 1.3, 2.3; negative likelihood ratio [–
LR] = 0.2; 95% CI: 0.1, 0.4) and hypomobility with the pa -
tellar tilt test (+LR = 5.4; 95% CI: 1.4, 20.8; –LR = 0.6; 95% 
CI: 0.5, 0.8).215
IA systematic review of reviews concluded that func -
tional tasks that cause AKP, such as squatting, stair 
climbing, and sitting with flexed knees, are cur -
rently the best diagnostic tests for PFP.222 Accordingly, in the 
recent study by Collins et al,61 a large majority of individuals 
with PFP reported at least some difficulty with squatting 
(93.7%), stair negotiation (91.2%), and running (90.8%).
IIA systematic review on the accuracy of diagnostic 
tests for PFP reported that diagnosis is challenging 
in part due to the lack of a clear gold standard as a 
reference test.64 Studies of diagnostic test accuracy rely on a 
physician’s diagnosis, the presence of AKP believed to be re -
lated to the PFJ, and/or provocation of retropatellar/peri -
patellar pain with activity as reference standards.64
IIA systematic review examining diagnostic test ac -
curacy for PFP reported that this condition should 
be considered a diagnosis of exclusion; other condi -
tions that may cause AKP must be ruled out prior to ruling 
in PFP.64,71,311
Evidence Synthesis and Clinical Rationale
Diagnosis of PFP is challenging due to differing reference 
standards used to determine diagnostic test accuracy.64 Re-
gardless of reference standard, diagnostic tests for PFP have 
poor accuracy.64,215,222 Clusters of diagnostic tests that have 
been examined to date have not improved diagnostic accu -
racy.215 The best diagnostic tests at this time are those that 
provoke AKP during functional activities when the PFJ is 
loaded in a flexed-knee position.222 Accordingly, reproduc -
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg18   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPFP Impairment/Function-Based Classification Subcategories
1. Support for the “overuse/overload without other impair -
ment” subcategory is based on the following evidence.
IIIOne potential factor leading to PFP is performing 
activities that load the patellofemoral compartment 
with too much load magnitude,96 too much load fre -
quency,96 and/or at too great a rate of increase, that is, over -
use.55,277,278 When individuals increase the magnitude and/or 
frequency of PFJ loading during an activity at a rate greater 
than musculoskeletal tissues can adapt, they move into a zone 
of supraphysiologic overload and eventual pain.96,235 Evidence 
of excessive physiologic loading has been reported for runners 
with PFP who exhibited increased patellar bone water content, 
suggestive of patellar swelling, compared to pain-free con -
trols.138 Draper et al93 also reported elevated PFJ bone meta -
bolic activity in individuals with chronic PFP, which may be a 
response to bone stress. They found a moderate positive cor -
relation between tracer uptake in PFJ bone and pain intensity 
(R2 = 0.55, P = .0005), suggesting an association between bone 
remodeling and PFP.93 Individuals at risk of developing PFP 
due to overuse may include athletes55,128,277,278 and the military 
population when undergoing basic training.155,277
Load Magnitude
Load magnitude refers to the amount of PFJ loading result -
ing from physical activity. Briani et al37 compared reported 
knee pain in women with and without PFP who participat -
ed in moderate or intense physical activity. Women in the 
intense physical activity PFP group reported significantly 
higher self-reported knee pain during the previous month 
and before a PFJ loading protocol used in this study.37 A re -
gression analysis revealed that 32% of reported pain intensity 
was predicted by intense physical activity levels. Moderate 
physical activity level was not a significant predictor of pain.
One population that experiences rapid increases in the over -
all magnitude of PFJ loading is military recruits during basic 
training. Thijs et al281 conducted a prospective study of male 
and female officer cadets entering a military academy and ini -
tiated a 6-week intensive physical training program. Eighty-
four of the 105 cadets had no history of previous knee injury or 
pain (65 males). Thirty-six of these 84 (43%) cadets (25 males) 
developed PFP during training. The authors concluded that 
PFP in this population resulted from repetitive loads placed 
on the PFJ tissues with minimal recovery time.281
Overuse as a cause of PFP may be related to greater running 
magnitude and runner experience (eg, recreational runners 
and higher-caliber runners). A retrospective analysis of 2002 
patients with running injuries showed that the most com -
mon running-related injury for both sexes was PFP.277 Mul -
tivariate analysis revealed that being either a higher-caliber IIISelfe et al261 conducted a cross-sectional observa -
tional study examining a classification system con -
sisting of 6 proposed subcategories for PFP, the 
targeted interventions for patellofemoral pain syndrome 
(TIPPS). These 6 subcategories were based on expert consen -
sus and clinically feasible assessment tests.258 Because the 
subcategories were found to not be mutually exclusive,261 the 
original 6 subcategories were revised and collapsed into 3 
subcategories: weak and tight, weak and pronated foot, and 
strong.261 The TIPPS classification system has yet to be ap -
plied to patients to determine its efficacy in guiding treat -
ment and improving outcomes.
IVA PFP classification system that utilizes clinical 
tests was proposed by Selhorst et al262 in a case-se -
ries pilot feasibility study for targeted interven -
tions. The authors used results from the Fear-Avoidance 
Beliefs Questionnaire and clinical tests of impairment and 
neuromuscular deficits to classify patients. This classification 
pilot study was conducted in adolescents with a mean ± SD 
age of 14.10 ± 1.38 years,262 potentially resulting in minimal 
applicability to adults with PFP.
Evidence Synthesis and Clinical Rationale
Patellofemoral pain is a heterogeneous condition; persons 
with PFP do not all have the same impairments, and not all 
persons with PFP respond to the same interventions.18,311 At 
this time, there is no valid and reliable classification system 
for PFP that does not require imaging or surgical findings. 
A classification system based on symptoms and physical 
examination findings would be useful to guide the physical 
therapist’s plan of care.258,261,262 Such a classification system 
would be useful to select interventions for persons with PFP. 
It would also be useful for researchers to examine factors 
associated with subcategories of PFP and to determine the 
optimal interventions for each subcategory.
Gaps in Knowledge
No PFP classification system exists that is based on symp -
toms and physical examination findings and has been shown 
to be valid and reliable.
Recommendation
FGiven the absence of a previously established valid 
classification system for PFP, the CPG group pro -
poses a classification consisting of 4 subcategories 
associated with the ICF. This proposed classification system 
is based on published evidence; the subcategories are named 
according to predominant impairments previously docu -
mented in persons with PFP. Clinicians may consider using 
the proposed impairment/function-based PFP classification 
system to guide patient/client management.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg19
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesof PFJ loading at a rate that surpasses the ability of the PFJ 
tissues to recover.
2. Support for the “muscle performance deficits” subcategory 
is based on the following evidence.
Hip Strength Deficits
IIIFemales with PFP have hip weakness, particularly 
with isometric strength testing.241,245,286 Originally 
thought to be a risk factor for PFP onset, hip weak -
ness, especially of the hip abductors, extensors, and external 
rotators, has been shown to result from PFP.133,245
Hip/Thigh Strength Responders
The reason for the resulting hip weakness remains unclear; 
however, evidence supports the importance of resistance ex -
ercises targeting the hip muscles as part of the intervention 
for individuals with PFP.168,228 While an important treatment 
strategy, not all individuals with PFP may respond favorably. 
Ferber et al105 compared outcomes for 199 individuals with 
PFP who completed either a 6-week hip/core- or knee-based 
exercise program. They found that 67% of participants re -
sponded favorably to treatment, regardless of group assign -
ment. In a secondary analysis, the authors determined that 
only males and females who exhibited an increase in hip and 
thigh strength following treatment responded positively to 
the resistance exercise intervention.31 Beginning strength 
values, expressed as a percentage of body mass, for males 
who responded favorably were, on average, 37%, 13%, 28%, 
and 44% of body mass for the hip abductors, hip external 
rotators, hip extensors, and quadriceps, respectively. Values 
for female responders were, on average, 30%, 17%, 30%, and 
37% of body mass for the hip abductors, hip external rotators, 
hip extensors, and quadriceps, respectively.
Gap in Knowledge
While we have provided average values to identify weakness, 
additional investigations are needed to further quantify 
strength values using identical methods.
Summary
A subcategory of individuals with PFP may respond favorably 
to hip and knee resistance exercises. Classification into the 
muscle performance deficits subcategory is made with a fair 
level of certainty when the patient presents with lower extrem -
ity muscle performance deficits in the hip and quadriceps.
3. Support for the “movement coordination deficits” subcat -
egory is based on the following evidence.
IIIPowers237 has theorized that increased hip adduc -
tion, hip internal rotation, and knee abduction (ie, 
knee valgus) during dynamic activities can increase runner, defined as competing at provincial/state, national, or 
international levels (ie, highly competitive running level), or 
a recreational runner who ran less than 5 hours per week was 
a protective factor for PFP onset in females.277 This finding 
suggested that the PFJ structures in the most experienced 
runners most likely had adapted to, and thus were capable 
of tolerating, the imposed loads. Alternatively, runners with 
much less experience most likely did not apply the magnitude 
of loading necessary to adversely affect the PFJ.
An injury prevention program had no effect on PFP or oth -
er lower extremity overuse injuries in military recruits.38 
Brushøj et al38 developed a prevention program to address 
common impairments (eg, gluteal and quadriceps muscle 
weakness, quadriceps tightness, and increased knee valgus 
during squatting and lunging tasks) for military recruits 
prior to beginning a 3-month basic training program. At the 
end of the basic training program, no differences existed in 
overuse injury rates between those who participated in the 
prevention program and controls.38 This finding suggests that 
increased magnitude of PFJ loading during physical activity, 
with insufficient tissue recovery time, may be the strongest 
etiologic factor for PFP in the military population.
Load Frequency
Load frequency refers to the amount of repetition of an activi -
ty. Recreational runners who increase not only the magnitude 
of loading but also the frequency of loading, with inadequate 
tissue recovery time, represent a cohort at high risk for de -
veloping PFP. Thijs et al279 examined the foot posture (higher 
or lower arch) and motion (pronation and supination) of 102 
(89 females) novice recreational runners enrolled in a 10-
week start-to-run program. They prospectively followed the 
runners and reported that 17 participants developed PFP. 
Analyses showed that neither foot posture nor motion pre -
dicted PFP onset.279 In a subsequent prospective study, Thijs 
et al280 followed 77 novice female recreational runners (with 
no history of prior knee injury or pain) enrolled in a 10-week 
start-to-run program to determine the effect of peak isomet -
ric hip muscle force on PFP onset. Sixteen runners developed 
PFP; however, logistic regression did not identify isometric 
hip force as a predictive factor for onset of PFP.280 Together, 
results from these studies showed that impairments com -
monly associated with PFP were not predictive of PFP on -
set. These findings suggested that beginning a new repetitive 
activity involving PFJ loading could have caused PFP onset.
Summary
A subcategory of individuals with PFP may have pain primar -
ily due to overuse/overload. Classification into the overuse/
overload without other impairment subcategory is made with 
a fair level of certainty when the patient presents with a his -
tory suggesting an increase in magnitude and/or frequency 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg20   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesThe diagnosis of PFP with movement coordination deficits 
is made with a fair level of certainty when the patient pre-
sents with excessive or poorly controlled knee valgus during 
a dynamic task, not necessarily due to weakness of the lower 
extremity musculature.
4. Support for the “mobility impairments” subcategory is 
based on the following evidence.
Hypermobility-Related Influences
IIIAlthough patellar instability is outside the scope 
of this CPG, increased foot mobility deserves at -
tention. Selfe et al261 classified individuals with 
PFP and a greater than 6-point Foot Posture Index (FPI) 
score as having a pronated foot. Mills et al196 found benefi -
cial effects with orthosis use for individuals with PFP and a 
greater than 11-mm difference between non–weight-bearing 
and weight-bearing midfoot width. Moreover, the use of 
foot orthoses has been recommended as an adjunctive treat -
ment for PFP.18
Hypomobility-Related Influences
Lack of flexibility of structures around the knee has been 
more extensively examined due to their direct or indirect 
potential for increasing the compressive forces at the PFJ. 
Commonly assessed structures have included the ham -
strings, quadriceps, gastrocnemius, soleus, lateral reti -
naculum (using the patellar tilt test), and iliotibial band. 
Piva at al232 found several significant differences when 
comparing flexibility between those with and without PFP. 
In individuals with PFP, hamstring (measured by passive 
hip flexion during a straight leg raise performed in supine), 
gastrocnemius (measured by ankle dorsiflexion performed 
in prone with the knee extended), and soleus (measured 
by ankle dorsiflexion performed in prone with the knee 
flexed) lengths, when measured by goniometry, were less 
than 79.1°, 7.4°, and 14.8°, respectively. The authors also 
reported values of less than 11° for iliotibial band (measured 
in the Ober position with the knee flexed to 90°) and 134.0° 
for quadriceps (measured with prone knee flexion) lengths 
when measured using an inclinometer. A positive patellar 
tilt test assessed via palpation can suggest lateral retinacu -
lum tightness in the PFP population.215
Gaps in Knowledge
Hip internal and external rotation ROM has received some 
attention. Specifically, limited hip external rotation ROM 
could place the femur in a more internally rotated position, 
leading to an increased dynamic Q angle and lateral PFJ 
loading.130,236 Further work is needed to identify threshold 
values for hip ROM potentially contributing to PFP. Future 
studies also are needed to better understand responses to 
treatment specifically directed toward these structures.the dynamic Q angle. Knee abduction and external rotation 
also increase the Q angle by moving the tibial tubercle lateral 
relative to the patella. Together, these altered movements can 
impart increased stress to the lateral PFJ.177,253
Clinicians commonly observe hip and knee movement dur -
ing an SLS to identify individuals with PFP and movement 
coordination deficits. Findings from independent investiga -
tions support that females with PFP perform the SLS with an 
increased FPPA134 and greater medial knee displacement125,307 
than controls. Medial knee displacement during the SLS also 
has been associated with increased hip adduction and knee 
external rotation during running and jumping tasks.307 It is 
noteworthy that these investigators did not assess hip or knee 
strength,134,307 precluding the ability to discern the effect, if 
any, of hip and knee strength on the FPPA.
Almeida et al5 compared hip strength and the FPPA during 
the SLS in individuals with and without PFP. Those with PFP 
demonstrated less hip strength and higher FPPA than con -
trols. However, a significant correlation between hip strength 
and FPPA only existed for controls, and these correlations, 
while significant, were not strong for controls (hip abduc -
tor torque and peak FPPA: P<.05, R2 = 0.096). This finding 
suggested that factors other than strength likely affected SLS 
performance in those with PFP.242
Decreased neuromuscular control may contribute to an in -
creased FPPA during dynamic tasks. While we cannot con -
clusively make this determination, emerging data support 
the importance of movement retraining. Graci and Salsich120 
examined trunk, hip, and knee kinematics during the SLS 
in females with PFP under 2 conditions (with and without 
instruction for maintaining good pelvic and hip position) in 
a single session. With instruction, participants performed 
the SLS with a significant increase in contralateral pelvic 
elevation and decreases in hip adduction and internal rota -
tion. Moreover, a significant association existed between de -
creased pain and less hip internal rotation ( r = 0.46).
Gaps in Knowledge
Additional studies are needed to identify the best methods 
and threshold values for identifying movement coordination 
deficits.131 Future works also are needed to better understand 
the effect that movement retraining may specifically have on 
these measures.
Summary
A subcategory of individuals with PFP may respond fa -
vorably to gait retraining and movement re-education 
interventions, leading to improvements in lower extrem -
ity kinematics and pain and suggesting the importance of 
assessing dynamic knee valgus during movement.35,100,206,252 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg21
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesClinicians should use review-of-systems screening tools to 
screen for medical and other conditions requiring referral 
of a patient to another health care provider.111 The Optimal 
Screening for Prediction of Referral and Outcome-review of 
systems (OSPRO-ROS) tool was developed in a cohort study of 
431 patients with primary complaints of back, neck, knee, and 
shoulder conditions treated in 11 outpatient physical therapy 
clinics.111 Review-of-systems screening tools provide the clini -
cian with a systematic method to screen for red flags that may 
indicate more sinister causes of musculoskeletal pain.111 The 
score on a 10-item OSPRO-ROS improved prediction of men -
tal health quality of life at 12 months in a follow-up validation 
study.112 Adding 13 items to the OSPRO-ROS improved pre -
diction of change in comorbidity status at 12 months.112
To screen for the presence of acute fracture as a cause of 
knee pain, clinicians should use either the Ottawa97,163 or 
Pittsburgh163,257 knee decision rules. Both of these decision 
rules have high sensitivity for acute knee fracture, and their 
use has been shown to avoid unnecessary radiography.163 The 
Ottawa knee rule is reported to be more sensitive than the 
Pittsburgh knee rule, but it is limited to persons aged 18 years 
and older.163 The Pittsburgh knee rule may be used with per -
sons of all ages.163
Hip and thigh pathology has been reported to refer pain to 
the knee.179 Persons who participate in high levels of physical 
activity (eg, military personnel undergoing physical training) 
may develop femoral fractures that masquerade as PFP.45,304 
Children and adolescents with knee pain may have referred 
pain from a slipped capital femoral epiphysis or other hip 
pathology.1,316,317 In children with knee pain, a limp is a sign 
of possible hip pathology.1,316
Musculoskeletal Differential Diagnosis
Following exclusion of medical conditions that require re -
ferral of the patient to a physician, the clinician must rule 
out other musculoskeletal conditions that may cause AKP. 
These conditions are appropriate for physical therapy but 
may require a plan of care that is different from that for the 
treatment of PFP. The differential diagnosis should consider 
conditions that are distant but may refer pain to the knee, 
for example, lumbar radiculopathy, peripheral nerve entrap -
ment, or hip OA.24,40
The lumbar spine may refer pain to the anterior thigh and 
knee.24,40 Clinicians should perform a lower-quarter screen as 
part of the examination of a patient with suspected PFP, in -
cluding examination of the lumbar spine and sacroiliac joint 
regions. Clinicians should refer to the low back pain CPG 
published by the Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy, 
APTA, Inc for guidance on screening for the presence of re -
ferred pain from the low back.83Summary
A subcategory of individuals with PFP may have impair -
ments related to either hypermobile or hypomobile struc -
tures. The diagnosis of PFP with mobility impairments is 
made with a fair level of certainty when the patient pre  sents 
with higher than normal foot mobility and/or flexibility def -
icits of 1 or more of the following structures: hamstrings, 
quadriceps, gastrocnemius, soleus, lateral retinaculum, or 
iliotibial band.
Classification Summary
Clinicians should consider serious pathological conditions 
other than/separate from PFP when the patient’s reported 
activity limitations or impairments of body function and 
structure are not consistent with those presented in the 
Diagnosis and Classification sections of this guideline, or 
when the patient’s symptoms are not resolving with inter -
ventions aimed at normalization of the patient’s impair -
ments of body function. Clinicians should consider whether 
the patient corresponds to 1 or more of the following cat -
egories: (1) overuse/overload without other impairment, 
(2) muscle performance deficits, (3) movement coordina -
tion deficits, and/or (4) mobility impairments. In addition, 
clinicians should identify the level of tissue irritability and 
should screen for the presence of psychological factors that 
may impact the patient’s response to physical therapy and/
or require referral to another health care practitioner.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Clinicians should consider diagnostic classifications associ -
ated with serious medical conditions, other musculoskeletal 
conditions, or psychosocial factors when the patient’s re -
ported activity limitations or impairments of body function 
and structure are not consistent with those presented in 
the Diagnosis and Classification sections of this guideline, 
or when the patient’s symptoms are not resolving with in -
terventions aimed at normalization of the patient’s impair -
ments of body function.
Medical Differential Diagnosis
The following medical conditions, although not intended to 
be a comprehensive list, should be in the clinician’s differen -
tial diagnosis for knee pain and require referral to another 
health care practitioner43:
• Tumors
• Dislocation
• Septic arthritis
• Arthrofibrosis
• Deep vein thrombosis
• Neurovascular compromise
• Fracture (local and/or at the hip)
• Slipped capital femoral epiphysis in children or adolescents
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg22   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesmovement (a positive apprehension test) may provide confir -
mation.162 Clinicians should refer to the consensus statement 
written by the international patellofemoral osteoarthritis 
consortium for clinical symptoms and signs to screen for the 
presence of PFOA.293
Anterior knee pain in children may be due to apophysitis of 
the tibial tubercle (Osgood-Schlatter disease) or the inferior 
pole of the patella (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease).317,318 
Clinicians should use the patient’s age and the presence 
of tenderness to palpation over the tibial tubercle or infe -
rior pole of the patella to determine the presence of these 
conditions.316
Patellofemoral pain may be experienced following surgical 
procedures, for example, anterior cruciate ligament recon -
struction (ACLR).76,77 Although PFP is common in persons 
following ACLR, this may present differently from nonsur -
gical PFP due to alterations in the normal knee biomechan -
ics.77 This guideline does not apply to PFP following surgery 
to the knee or other musculoskeletal regions of the lower 
extremity.
Screening for Psychological Factors
Clinicians should screen for the presence of psychological 
issues that may require referral to a health care practitio -
ner in addition to physical therapy, for example, a clini -
cal psychologist.186,187 Psychological factors including pain 
catastrophizing, kinesiophobia, fear avoidance, anxiety, and 
depression are considered yellow flags that may affect prog -
nosis and rehabilitation treatment decision making.178 In 
addition to potential referral, patients with PFP who exhibit 
psychological factors may require the therapist to employ 
specific patient education strategies to optimize outcomes 
from physical therapy interventions, for example, cognitive-
behavioral treatment, reassurance, and graded exposure to 
activity.25
Persons with PFP may be under psychological stress and may 
also have chronic pain and central sensitization. Psychologi -
cal stress negatively influences recovery. Fear of reinjury/
pain/movement is a frequently cited reason that athletes do 
not return to sport or reduce their level of physical activity 
in other knee disorders.9,10 A systematic review reported that 
catastrophization and fear avoidance had strong and con -
sistent associations with pain and function in persons with 
PFP.186 Chronic pain can be accompanied by central sensitiza -
tion, which encompasses factors like hyperalgesia (reduced 
pressure pain threshold) to regions both at and remote to the 
“involved” structure. Noehren et al213 found that females with 
PFP reported lower pressure pain thresholds (determined via 
pressure algometry) in multiple sites at the knee as well as 
the elbow.Hip OA has been reported to present with a primary com -
plaint of knee pain.171,233 Clinicians should refer to the hip 
pain and mobility deficits—hip OA CPG published by the 
Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy, APTA, Inc for 
guidance on the examination procedures and symptoms to 
determine the presence of hip OA.51,52
The differential diagnosis should also consider conditions lo -
cal to the knee, for example, ligamentous (cruciate and collat -
eral) injuries, meniscus injuries, articular cartilage injuries, 
OA, distal iliotibial band syndrome (ITBS), quadriceps and 
patellar tendinopathies, plica syndrome, patellar (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson lesion) and tibial (Osgood-Schlatter le -
sion) apophysitis, and patellar subluxation or dislocation 
(instability).
Structures that are part of the tibiofemoral articulation, such 
as ligament, meniscus, and articular cartilage injuries, may 
be a source of AKP.227 Clinicians should refer to the CPGs 
published by the Academy of Orthopaedic Physical Therapy, 
APTA, Inc for guidance on the examination procedures for 
determining the presence of ligamentous, meniscal, and ar -
ticular cartilage conditions/injuries.181-184 Persons with ITBS 
are typically runners, complain of onset of lateral knee pain 
following running for 1.2 km or longer, and have pain pro -
voked by palpation of the lateral femoral epicondyle with the 
knee at 30° of flexion (Noble compression test).13
The patellofemoral articulation may have musculoskeletal 
conditions other than PFP that cause knee pain.161 The fol -
lowing differential diagnosis has been suggested for knee 
pain based on anatomical site43:
• Anterior knee pain
- PFP
- Patellar tendinopathy (jumper’s knee)
- Patellar subluxation or dislocation (instability)
- Tibial apophysitis (Osgood-Schlatter lesion)
- Patellar apophysitis (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease)
Clinicians should use information from the patient’s age, 
history, provocative activities, and physical examination test 
results to screen for the presence of other possible causes of 
AKP.43,293 Pain from patellar tendinopathy is typically local -
ized to the inferior pole of the patella or near the tibial tu -
bercle.188 Patellar tendinopathy may be differentiated from 
PFP by pain located over the patellar tendon, tenderness to 
palpation of the patellar tendon, and symptom response. Pain 
from patellar tendinopathy is aggravated by activities that 
require higher rates of knee extensor loading, such as jump -
ing (eg, basketball, volleyball) or high-speed sprinting (eg, 
football/soccer).188 If patellar instability or a history of patel -
lar dislocation is suspected from subjective interview, then 
reported apprehension with passively applied lateral patellar 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg23
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesis a concise, multidimensional yellow flag assessment tool, 
developed from a study of 431 patients with musculoskeletal 
conditions examined with 136 items from 11 validated ques -
tionnaires of psychological constructs.178 The score on the 
OSPRO-YF was found to improve prediction of persistent 
musculoskeletal pain intensity, disability, and quality of life 
at 12 months.112Screening tools for psychological factors and other yellow 
flags can be used by the clinician during the examination. 
These tools include the Pain Catastrophizing Scale,272 the 
Fear-Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire,297 and the OSPRO 
yellow flag assessment tool (OSPRO-YF).178 The Fear-Avoid -
ance Beliefs Questionnaire items have been modified to re -
fer to the knee rather than to the back.118 The OSPRO-YF 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg24   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesCLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Examination
OUTCOME MEASURES
Activity Limitations/Self-report Measures
A vast number of patient-reported outcome measures 
(PROMs) have been developed and used to assess a patient’s 
perceived function and change in status over time for persons 
with PFP. These PROMs have varying levels of evidence to 
support their use for individuals with impairments of body 
function and structure, activity limitations, and participation 
restrictions associated with PFP.
Systematic Reviews
IPapadopoulos et al222 performed a high-quality sys -
tematic review of reviews for several factors related 
to PFP, including outcome measurements. The au -
thors identified 2 systematic reviews of outcome measures, 
by Howe et al146 and Esculier et al,101 which they evaluated 
using the A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews 
(AMSTAR) scoring tool. Results of these 2 reviews are pre -
sented individually below.
IEsculier et al101 performed a high-quality systematic 
review of 24 articles on the psychometric properties 
of 5 PROMs. Only PROMs that had at least 5 stud -
ies evaluating their psychometric properties were included: 
the Knee Outcome Survey-Activities of Daily Living Scale 
(KOS-ADLS), AKPS (originally known as the Kujala scale), 
International Knee Documentation Committee 2000 Subjec -
tive Knee Evaluation Form (IKDC), Lysholm scale, and FIQ. 
Several aspects of validity were assessed: content validity, 
construct validity, discriminant (known-groups) validity, 
structural (factorial) validity, and floor/ceiling effects. The 
KOS-ADLS and Lysholm scale were found to have satisfac -
tory content validity. The FIQ and AKPS were easy to com -
plete and were poor and good, respectively, at depicting 
symptoms. Construct validity for several PFP PROMs was 
examined by determining correlations between scales: KOS-
ADLS to Lysholm scale, IKDC to Lysholm scale, and AKPS 
to FIQ. These PROMs demonstrated moderate to high cor -
relations ( r>0.5) in samples including patients with PFP. The 
KOS-ADLS, AKPS, and Lysholm scale could discriminate 
between different patient populations of knee conditions and 
disability levels. All measures demonstrated adequate floor/
ceiling effects (less than 15% of participants achieved the low -
est or highest scores). The KOS-ADLS, IKDC, AKPS, and 
Lysholm scale demonstrated high test-retest reliability, with 
intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) ranging from 0.81 to 
0.99 and weighted average ICCs from 0.92 to 0.96. The ICCs for the FIQ ranged from 0.48 to 0.96 (weighted average ICC 
= 0.61). The minimal detectable change at the 95% confi -
dence level (MDC95) was 8.3 for the KOS-ADLS, 8.5 for the 
IKDC, 9.0 for the AKPS, 3.1 for the FIQ, and 30 for the 
Lysholm scale. All questionnaires, except the Lysholm scale, 
demonstrated good internal consistency, with Cronbach al -
pha values greater than .81 (Lysholm scale: α = .66). All ques -
tionnaires were found to be moderately to highly responsive 
(moderate to high effect size or standardized response mean) 
in patients with PFP.
IIA systematic review by Green et al121 reported on 7 
articles that evaluated the measurement properties 
of 12 PROMs. Several instruments had moderate 
levels of evidence for structural validity, a component of con -
struct validity: the Flandry Questionnaire ( r = 0.65-0.66 with 
the FIQ and the Eng and Pierrynowski Questionnaire [EPQ]), 
the FIQ ( r = –0.66 with the Flandry Questionnaire and EPQ), 
the EPQ ( r = 0.66 with the Flandry Questionnaire), the AKPS 
(r = 0.58 with the FIQ), and the VAS for “usual” pain and the 
VAS for “worst” pain were moderately correlated with each 
other ( r = 0.63). Limited evidence supported test-retest reli -
ability and cross-cultural and hypothesis testing components 
of validity for the Persian version of the AKPS.
IIIHowe et al146 performed a low-quality systematic 
review examining the clinimetric properties of 
PROMs used with patients treated for various mus -
culoskeletal knee conditions, including ligamentous injuries, 
meniscal lesions, OA, and PFP. The outcome measures ap -
praised by Howe et al146 also included clinician-administered 
instruments. In addition to the low quality of the systematic 
review, the authors did not critically appraise the articles in -
cluded in their review. Using expert consensus, Howe et al146 
concluded that the AKPS demonstrated sufficient content 
validity, test-retest reliability, and responsiveness to change 
for persons with PFP according to the Outcome Measures in 
Rheumatology (OMERACT) filter. They also reported that 
the Lower Extremity Functional Scale (LEFS) demonstrated 
sufficient construct validity and test-retest reliability for PFP 
according to the OMERACT filter.
Anterior Knee Pain Scale
The AKPS, originally known as the Kujala scale, is a 13-item 
questionnaire for knee function in persons of all ages with 
AKP, scored out of 100, with higher scores indicating less 
disability.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg25
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesIThe psychometric properties of the English version 
of the AKPS have been examined in 2 level I stud -
ies.70,302 Crossley et al70 evaluated the concurrent 
validity of the AKPS by correlating change in the AKPS with 
the global rating of change (GROC). Participants with GROC 
ratings of +3 or higher (scale of –7 to +7, with –7 as the worst 
status and +7 as the best status) were considered to have im -
proved. Concurrent validity using Spearman’s rho was 0.69. 
Test-retest reliability was evaluated in 2 studies70,302 and was 
found to be excellent (ICC = 0.817 and 0.953, respectively). 
Responsiveness was reported in several studies. Crossley et 
al70 reported that the AKPS median change score could dis -
criminate between those who improved and those who were 
worse or stayed the same. Watson et al302 reported that the 
AKPS change score had a fair association ( r = 0.42) with the 
criterion score (average of the therapist’s and patient’s GROC 
score). The AKPS demonstrated fair discriminatory ability 
between those with clinically meaningful reduction of patel -
lofemoral symptoms and those who did not have a reduction 
(area under the receiver operating characteristic [ROC] 
curve [AUC] = 0.69). Crossley et al70 reported that the treat -
ment effect size of the AKPS was 1.15. The MDC for the AKPS 
was 13 points.302 The minimal clinically important difference 
(MCID) for the AKPS is 8 to 10 points.70
IMyer et al202 developed a 6-item short form of the 
AKPS in 499 girl and adolescent female athletes. 
The internal consistency of the 13-item form had a 
Cronbach alpha of .92 and a standard error of measurement 
(SEM) across all items of 0.003. Rasch difficulty (endors -
ability) estimates of the 6-item short form ranged from –3.57 
to 1.27. The internal consistency of the 6-item form had a 
Cronbach alpha of .88 and an SEM across all items of 0.004. 
Criterion validity of the 6-item form against the 13-item form 
was r = 0.96, with a point-biserial calculation of each form 
against the PFP diagnosis of r = 0.72. The AKPS demon -
strated excellent predictive ability between the 13-item long 
form and 6-item short form against the PFP diagnosis (AUC 
= 0.95 for the long form and AUC = 0.93 for the short form). 
A score of 4 on the short form and a score of 10 on the long 
form could correctly confirm a physician’s diagnosis of PFP 
with a sensitivity of 82% and specificity of 91%.
IIIttenbach et al149 evaluated the reliability and valid -
ity of the AKPS in 414 girl, adolescent female, and 
woman athletes (11.0-18.1 years of age). Criterion 
validity of the AKPS was evaluated against the physician’s 
diagnosis of knee pain. The median classification rates were 
high in both healthy athletes (86%) and in athletes with PFP 
(99%). The AKPS demonstrated good internal consistency 
for both the 13-item long form (Cronbach α = .91) and 6-item 
short form (Cronbach α = .84). The equivalence of the short 
form with the long form was high ( r = 0.98). The SEM for the long form was 3.0 points and for the short form was 1.2 
points.
AKPS Cross-cultural T ranslations
The AKPS has been translated and cross-culturally adapted 
into 10 languages, with psychometric evidence to support the 
use of the translations. These include Brazilian Portuguese,78 
French,39 Persian,209 Turkish,167 Spanish,117 Greek,220 Arabic,6 
Dutch,284 Chinese,49 and Thai.8 The MDC of the Dutch AKPS 
is reported to be 11 points.284
KOS-ADLS and Knee Outcome Survey-Sports Activity Scale
The KOS-ADLS is a 14-item questionnaire for knee symp -
toms and function during ADLs due to a variety of knee 
disorders, including PFP. It is scored out of 70 points, then 
converted to 100 points to yield percentages, with higher 
scores indicating less disability. The Knee Outcome Survey-
Sports Activity Scale (KOS-SAS) is an 11-item questionnaire 
for knee symptoms and function during sports activities due 
to a variety of knee disorders. It has a total score of 55 points, 
converted to 100 points to yield percentages, with higher 
scores indicating less disability.
IPiva et al231 assessed the responsiveness of the KOS-
ADLS in 60 individuals with PFP before and after 
an intervention program by comparing KOS-ADLS 
scores to GROC scores. The KOS-ADLS had a moderate stan -
dardized effect size (0.63) and demonstrated excellent dis -
crimination between those whose GROC scores worsened 
and those whose scores did not (AUC = 0.83). The MCID for 
the KOS-ADLS was estimated from a ROC curve and was 
found to be a 5-point change in raw score or 7.1 percentage 
points on the KOS-ADLS.
IIIBradbury et al36 reported on the association be -
tween KOS-ADLS and KOS-SAS scores with the 
Global Rating Scale (GRS) of perceived knee func -
tion. In a group of 15 patients with PFP, the GRS was strongly 
associated with the KOS-ADLS ( r = 0.85) and with the KOS-
SAS ( r = 0.88).
IVSiqueira et al265 evaluated the KOS-ADLS and 
IKDC in 31 patients with PFP. The KOS-ADLS and 
IKDC were moderately correlated with each other 
(r = 0.46). Test-retest reliability of the KOS-ADLS was excel -
lent (Spearman ρ = 0.99). The KOS-ADLS was deemed more 
reliable than the IKDC.
KOS-ADLS Cross-cultural T ranslations
The KOS-ADLS has been translated and cross-culturally 
adapted into Turkish, with psychometric evidence to sup -
port its use.103 The MDC of the Turkish KOS-ADLS was 2.59 
points out of a total score of 70 points.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg26   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesand Hughston Clinic subjective knee questionnaire, respec -
tively).175 Test-retest reliability of the PSS was excellent when 
assessed in a sample of 24 of the original 29 participants 
(Spearman ρ = 0.95).175
PSS Cross-cultural T ranslations
The PSS has been translated and cross-culturally adapted 
into Brazilian Portuguese,78 Greek,221 and Chinese,48 with 
psychometric evidence to support their use. The MDC for 
the Greek PSS was 1.87 points.221 The MDC for the Chinese 
PSS was 6.34 points.48
Pain VAS and EPQ
IThe 10-cm VAS has been evaluated for reliability, 
validity, and responsiveness for ratings of “usual” 
pain, “worst” pain, and pain during activity (VAS 
for activity, also known as the EPQ).47,70 Chesworth et al47 
evaluated the test-retest reliability of the VAS for worst pain 
in 18 patients with PFP and found moderate reliability ( r = 
0.60). Crossley et al70 evaluated the test-retest reliability of 
the VAS for worst pain and the VAS for usual pain in 17 
patients with PFP and found moderate reliability for both 
measures (ICC = 0.76 and 0.56, respectively). Crossley et 
al70 also evaluated the test-retest reliability for VAS pain 
during 6 aggravating activities (walking, running, squatting, 
sitting, ascending stairs, and descending stairs), with the 
combined score being referred to as the VAS for activity or 
EPQ. The VAS for activity’s test-retest reliability was excel -
lent (ICC = 0.83).70 Concurrent validity, assessed with cor -
relation of change (Spearman rho), in each outcome 
instrument with the GROC was –0.67 for the VAS for usual 
pain, –0.68 for the VAS for worst pain, and –0.68 for the 
VAS for activity. Responsiveness was defined as the per -
ceived rating of change. Each outcome measure’s median 
change score could discriminate between those who im -
proved and those who were worse or stayed the same. The 
treatment effect size was 0.95 for the VAS for usual pain, 
1.09 for the VAS for worst pain, and 0.76 for the VAS for 
activity. The MCID for each measure was 1.5 to 2 cm for the 
VAS for usual pain, 2 cm for the VAS for worst pain, and 8 
to 13 cm for the VAS for activity.
Numeric Pain-Rating Scale
IPiva et al231 assessed the responsiveness of the 
11-point numeric pain-rating scale (NPRS), with 0 
being “no pain” and 10 being the “worst imaginable 
pain,” in 60 individuals with PFP before and after an inter -
vention program. The NPRS had a moderate standardized 
effect size (0.74) and demonstrated excellent discrimination 
between those whose scores worsened and those whose 
scores did not (AUC = 0.84). The MCID for the NPRS was 
–1.2 points for a decrease in pain score, according to the ROC 
curve.The FIQ and Modified FIQ
The FIQ is an 8-item questionnaire for knee function due to 
a variety of knee disorders, including PFP. It is scored out of 
16 points, with higher scores indicating less disability. The 
modified FIQ is a 10-item questionnaire for knee pain and 
function for a variety of knee disorders, including PFP. The 
modified FIQ is scored out of 100 points, with higher scores 
indicating greater disability and worse pain.
IThe psychometric properties of the English version 
of the FIQ have been examined in 2 level I stud -
ies.47,70 The test-retest reliability was fair in both 
studies: Chesworth et al47 (r = 0.48) and Crossley et al70 (ICC 
= 0.49). Concurrent validity was assessed in comparison with 
the GROC, and the Spearman rho was 0.65.70 Responsiveness 
was defined as the perceived rating of change. The FIQ me -
dian change score could discriminate between those who 
improved and those who were worse or stayed the same.70 
The treatment effect size was 0.49.70 The FIQ had an MCID 
of 2 points or 13% of the total score.70
IVSelfe et al259,260 investigated the reliability and valid -
ity of the modified FIQ in 77 participants (66.2% 
female). The modified FIQ is a 10-item question -
naire whose language was modified for a European popula -
tion and that includes additional questions modified from the 
AKPS. Internal consistency, measured with Cronbach’s alpha, 
was .83.260 Test-retest reliability was assessed by calculating 
the mean of 2 modified FIQ scores and then subtracting each 
individual score from the mean to determine the error for 
each individual score. Using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Z sta-
tistic, the error scores were found to be normally distributed, 
indicating acceptable test-retest reliability (1.24; P = .09).260
FIQ Cross-cultural T ranslations
The FIQ has been translated and cross-culturally adapted 
into Brazilian Portuguese78 and Persian,208 with psychometric 
evidence to support their use.
Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome Severity Scale
The Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome Severity Scale (PSS) is 
a 10-item VAS questionnaire for knee pain severity during 
various activities in persons with AKP, scored out of 100, with 
higher scores indicating less disability.
ILaprade and Culham175 developed the PSS and 
evaluated its validity and test-retest reliability in 29 
military participants with PFP (7 females). Concur -
rent validity was assessed by comparison to the Western On -
tario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index 
(WOMAC) and the Hughston Clinic subjective knee ques -
tionnaire, showing strong positive correlations with both 
questionnaires (Spearman ρ = 0.72 and 0.83 for the WOMAC 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg27
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesEvidence Synthesis and Clinical Rationale
There are many PROMs for use with persons with PFP. Sev -
eral have been translated and cross-culturally adapted from 
English to various languages and cultures. At this time, the 
strongest evidence for validity, reliability, and responsive -
ness to change exists for the AKPS, KOOS-PF, and VAS for 
activity (EPQ). The AKPS has several translated and cross-
culturally adapted versions, with varying levels of evidence 
to support their validity, reliability, and responsiveness to 
change. The VAS for worst pain and VAS for usual pain have 
moderate reliability, concurrent validity, and responsiveness 
to change. The NPRS has evidence for responsiveness to 
change. Several additional PROMs have varying evidence 
to support their use as measures of pain and function in 
persons with PFP.
Recommendation
AClinicians should use the AKPS, KOOS-PF, or VAS 
for activity (EPQ) questionnaires to measure pain 
and function in patients with PFP. In addition, cli -
nicians should use the VAS for worst pain, the VAS for usual 
pain, or the NPRS to measure pain. Clinicians should use one 
of the translations and cross-cultural adaptations with dem -
onstrated validity, reliability, and responsiveness to change 
for patients in different countries and for those requiring 
questionnaires in languages other than English.
ACTIVITY LIMITATIONS
Physical Performance Measures
IThe most accurate diagnostic clinical test for PFP 
is reproduction of pain with squatting.64,215 The 
squatting maneuver is performed in a manner that 
feels normal to the individual. The test has a high –LR of 0.10 
to 0.20 (95% CI: 0.1, 0.4) ( TABLE 2 ), indicating that the prob -
ability of PFP being present when there is a negative test is 
moderately decreased.63,215,303
ISensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios were 
calculated for pain with stair climbing and pain 
with kneeling. These tests demonstrated moderate 
to high sensitivity and –LR ( TABLE 2 ), suggesting that the 
probability of PFP is moderately decreased when there is a 
negative test.63,65,205
ICollins et al61 conducted a retrospective review of 4 
separate studies of persons with PFP, including 459 
total participants, and found that 54.4% of persons 
with PFP reported increased knee pain with prolonged sit -
ting. Pain with prolonged sitting was found to have low to 
moderate diagnostic accuracy in an earlier systematic re -
view,64 which suggests that its presence may be a diagnostic 
indicator for PFP ( TABLE 2 ).Patellofemoral Pain and Osteoarthritis Subscale of the KOOS
ICrossley et al73 developed and evaluated a new KOOS 
subscale, the patellofemoral pain and osteoarthritis 
subscale (KOOS-PF). The KOOS-PF is an 11-item 
questionnaire for pain, stiffness, and quality of life in persons 
with PFP and knee OA. It is scored out of 100 points, with 
higher scores meaning less disability.73 In evaluating the mea -
surement properties of the KOOS-PF in 132 patients, the in -
ternal consistency was .86 (Cronbach’s alpha), the test-retest 
reliability was 0.86 (ICC), and the SEM was 6.8. The structural 
validity loaded mostly on 1 factor, “knee pain relating to activi -
ties that load the PF joint,” with an eigenvalue of 4.29. The 
KOOS-PF demonstrated moderate to good construct validity 
(convergent validity) with the AKPS ( r = 0.74) and Medical 
Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36) 
physical component summary ( r = 0.45). Construct validity 
was also established by a hypothesized low correlation of the 
KOOS-PF score with the SF-36 mental component summary 
(r = 0.07) (divergent validity). The KOOS-PF demonstrated 
good discriminant validity; those with higher levels of baseline 
pain had lower baseline KOOS-PF scores, and vice versa. The 
KOOS-PF change scores had fair responsiveness compared to 
GROC scores ( r = 0.52). The individual MDC of the KOOS-PF 
was 16 points. The minimal important change was 14.2 points. 
No floor or ceiling effects were reported.
The IKDC
The IKDC is a 10-item questionnaire for knee symptoms, 
function, and sports participation, with a maximum score 
of 100 points (least disability). The IKDC is designed for 
persons with orthopaedic conditions of the knee, includ -
ing PFP.
IVSiqueira et al265 evaluated the IKDC in 31 patients 
with PFP. Criterion validity of the IKDC was examined 
through comparison of scores with the KOS-ADLS 
using a Spearman correlation test. The IKDC was moderately 
correlated with the KOS-ADLS ( ρ= 0.46). Test-retest reliability 
of the IKDC was excellent (Spearman ρ = 0.96).
Lysholm Scale
The Lysholm scale is an 8-item questionnaire for knee symp -
toms, signs, and disability scored out of 100 points (100 is the 
least disability). It was originally designed for patients fol -
lowing knee ligament surgery but has been studied in other 
populations, including patients with PFP.101 Psychometric 
properties of the Lysholm scale are reported in the System -
atic Reviews section under Esculier et al.101
Lysholm Scale Cross-cultural Review
The Lysholm scale has been translated and cross-culturally 
adapted into Turkish, with psychometric evidence to support 
its use.46
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg28   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesue.63,65,126,210,215 Sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios are 
available in TABLE 3 .
Patellar Mobility T ests
IIThe patellar tilt test, a measure of lateral retinacu -
lar tightness, has low to moderate intratester ( κ = 
0.28-0.50) and intertester reliability ( κ = 0.19-
0.71).300,301 Yet, Haim et al126 reported high specificity (0.92; 
95% CI: 0.75, 0.98) and a moderate +LR of 5.4 for the patel -
lar tilt test, meaning that a positive finding would be useful 
for ruling in a diagnosis of PFP.
IIThe vastus medialis coordination test was designed 
to assess the mobility of the patella during an active 
non–weight-bearing maneuver. Nijs et al210 report -
ed high specificity (0.93; 95% CI: 0.75, 0.99) and +LR (2.26; 
95% CI: 1.9, 2.9) for this test ( TABLE 3 ).
IIIThere is a paucity of reliability and validity data for 
a number of tests to assess passive accessory motion 
of the patella relative to the femur (passive gliding 
patella, lateral pull test, patellar inferior pole test), with the 
reported data indicating poor to fair reliability ( κ = 0.31-
0.59).126,275,300 These patellar mobility tests demonstrate low 
diagnostic accuracy for PFP ( TABLE 3 ).
Foot Position T ests
IIThe navicular drop test is used to assess the amount 
of subtalar pronation.263 Interrater and intrarater 
reliability (ICC = 0.87-0.93 and ICC = 0.78-0.81, 
respectively) for the navicular drop test in patients with PFP 
is good to excellent ( TABLE 3 ).16,230
IISelfe et al261 used the FPI to identify patients with 
pronated feet. The FPI is a 6-item scale that assesses 
foot position based on talar head palpation, the cur -
vature above and below the lateral malleolus, rearfoot inver -
sion/eversion, and forefoot abduction/adduction. Patients with 
higher scores have more pronated feet.248,249,261 The reliability 
and validity of this measure are fair to good (ICCs from 0.52 
to 0.93) ( TABLE 3 ).16,66,249
IIIMidfoot width measured in a non–weight-bear -
ing and a weight-bearing position has been used 
to measure foot mobility. Like the FPI, the mid -
foot width measurement has excellent reliability and valid -
ity (ICC = 0.97-0.99).192 The MDC95 is 0.14 cm for the 
midfoot difference in weight bearing and 0.31 cm for the 
midfoot difference in non–weight bearing.192 Mills et al196 
reported that individuals with PFP who had a 1.1-cm or 
greater difference on the test had significantly greater im -
provements in pain with the use of foot orthoses compared 
to controls.IThe eccentric step-down test demonstrates 
moderate specificity (0.82; 95% CI: 0.62, 0.93) 
and +LR (2.3; 95% CI: 1.9, 2.9), suggesting that 
the probability of PFP being present when there is a posi -
tive test is moderately increased ( TABLE 2 ).215 Reproduc -
tion of AKP during the test is considered a positive test 
result.210
IIAnother test to assess movement quality is the 
FPPA during the SLS. The FPPA, a measure of 
knee valgus, is calculated by drawing a line on a 
photo from the anterior superior iliac spine to the midpoint 
of the tibiofemoral joint, and another line from the mid -
point of the tibiofemoral joint to the midpoint of the ankle 
mortise, and measuring the resulting angle.308 The FPPA 
has acceptable between-day reliability for healthy men (ICC 
= 0.88; 95% CI: 0.82, 0.93) and women (ICC = 0.72; 95% 
CI: 0.56, 0.82) as a test for increased knee valgus during the 
SLS ( TABLE 2 ).201
IIHarris-Hayes et al131 performed a cross-sectional 
study of 30 athletes to determine the reliability of 
video assessments of lower extremity movement pat -
terns (FPPA) and the construct validity of the measurement. 
Observers classified lower extremity movement patterns as 
dynamic valgus (greater than 10°  in the positive direction), 
dynamic varus (greater than 10°  in the negative direction), or 
no change (less than 10°  in either direction). They reported 
kappa values ranging from 0.80 to 0.90 for intratester reli -
ability and 0.75 to 0.90 for intertester reliability.
IIIPiva et al230 developed an assessment of the quality 
of movement during a lateral step-down test to as -
sess lower extremity biomechanics during a dynam -
ic task in individuals with PFP. Intertester reliability varies 
from 0.67 to 0.81 (95% CI: 0.58, 0.94),81,230,242 with 80% rater 
agreement ( TABLE 2 ).230
Recommendation
BClinicians should administer appropriate clinical or 
field tests that reproduce pain and assess lower-
limb movement coordination, such as squatting, 
step-downs, and the SLS. These tests can assess a patient’s 
baseline status relative to pain, function, and disability; glob -
al knee function; and changes in the patient’s status through -
out the course of treatment.
PHYSICAL IMPAIRMENT MEASURES
Patellar Provocation T ests
IIIPatellar pain provocation tests (compression test, 
Waldron test phases 1 and 2, patellar grind test, and 
Clarke’s sign) have shown low diagnostic val -
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg29
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesRecommendation
CWhen evaluating a patient with PFP over an epi -
sode of care, clinicians may assess body structure 
and function, including measures of patellar provo -
cation, patellar mobility, foot position, hip and thigh muscle 
strength, and muscle length.
BEST -PRACTICE POINT
Essential Data Elements
Clinicians should document the following measures, at least 
at baseline and discharge or at 1 other follow-up point, for 
all patients with PFP to support standardization for quality 
improvement in clinical care and research.
Diagnosis of PFP
• Retropatellar or peripatellar pain
• Reproduction of retropatellar or peripatellar pain with squat -
ting, stair climbing or descent, prolonged sitting, or other 
functional activities loading the PFJ in a flexed-knee position
• Exclusion of all other possible sources of AKP
• Patellofemoral pain cluster of findings
Classification of PFP
• Overuse/overload without other impairment
- Eccentric step-down test
• PFP with muscle performance deficits
- HipSIT
- Thigh strength testing
• PFP with movement coordination deficits
- Dynamic valgus on lateral step-down test
- Frontal plane valgus
• PFP with mobility impairments
- Hypermobility
• Foot mobility testing
- Midfoot width in non–weight bearing and weight bearing
- FPI
- Hypomobility
• Lateral patellar retinaculum (patellar tilt test)
• Muscle length testing
- Hamstrings
- Gastrocnemius
- Soleus
- Quadriceps
- Iliotibial band
• Hip internal and external rotation ROM testing
Activity Limitations—Physical Performance Measures
• Pain with squatting
Activity Limitations—Patient-Reported Measures
• AKPS or KOOS-PF for function
• VAS for usual pain and VAS for worst pain or NPRSMuscle Strength T ests
IIIThe Hip Stability Isometric Test (HipSIT) is de -
signed to measure the strength of the entire pos -
terolateral hip musculature.4 The HipSIT has 
demonstrated moderate to good concurrent validity com -
pared to individual posterolateral hip muscles ( r = 0.51-0.65), 
with excellent intratester and intertester reliability (ICC = 
0.98-0.99). The MDC95 has been established for healthy con -
trols (0.036 kg of force/kg of body mass) and those with PFP 
(0.034 kg of force/kg of body mass) ( TABLE 3 ).4
IVQuadriceps strength testing with a mechanical dy -
nanometer using a maximum voluntary isometric 
contraction is highly reliable (ICC = 0.97-0.98) 
(TABLE 3 ).50
A challenge is to measure hip and thigh strength to identify 
weakness. To date, isometric muscle testing with a handheld 
dynamometer has been the most widely used assessment 
tool.286 Proper testing methods are key to reliable and ac -
curate measurement ( TABLE 3 ).2,30,165
Muscle Length T ests
ILimited data exist regarding hip flexor length and 
hip internal and external rotation ROM. Hamstra-
Wright et al130 theorized that limited hip external 
rotation could contribute to increased femoral internal rota -
tion during weight-bearing activities and increased lateral 
PFJ loading.
IIIPiva et al230 established interrater reliability for 
tests commonly used to assess flexibility in patients 
with PFP. Hamstring, quadriceps, gastrocnemius, 
and iliotibial band length tests had poor to excellent reliabil -
ity, with ICCs ranging from 0.29 to 0.97 ( TABLE 3 ).16,230 Piva et 
al230 also performed a multivariate stepwise discriminant 
analysis to determine which measures were best for distin -
guishing between individuals with and without PFP. Of the 
flexibility measures, only the gastrocnemius and soleus 
lengths were identified. Weight-bearing ankle dorsiflexion 
ROM was the only factor associated with an increased FPPA 
during the SLS,242 suggesting that gastrocnemius length may 
impact movement during the SLS.
PFP Cluster of Findings
IIIA cluster of findings using a combination of history 
elements and common physical examination tests 
can be used to identify whether or not knee com -
plaints are likely due to PFP.81 Décary et al81 proposed 2 clus -
ters based on age, pain location, and clinical examination to 
help in the diagnosis of PFP. These clusters had a +LR of 8.70 
(95% CI: 5.20, 14.58). Similarly, 3 clusters were identified to 
exclude PFP (–LR = 0.12; 95% CI: 0.06, 0.27) ( TABLE 4 ).
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg30   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAbbreviations: ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; –LR, negative likelihood ratio; +LR, positive likelihood ratio.
*Values are intraclass correlation coefficient (95% confidence interval).
†Values in parentheses are 95% confidence interval.
aThe individual performs a squatting maneuver that feels normal to him or her.
bThe individual climbs stairs in a manner that feels normal to him or her.
cThe individual kneels in a manner that feels normal to him or her.
dThe individual stands with the foot of the leg to be tested near the edge of a 20-cm-high step, with hands on hips and the contralateral leg over the floor and 
the knee in extension. She or he bends the knee of the leg on the step, lowering the contralateral leg until the foot lightly touches the floor, and then straightens 
the tested knee and returns to the start position. This motion is repeated 5 times. The examiner stands in front of the individual to observe the quality of move -
ment. Each repetition is scored using the following point system: (a) 1 point for an arm strategy to maintain balance, (b) 1 point for trunk lean to either side, 
(c) 1 point for pelvic elevation and/or rotation to one side, (d) 1 point if the tibial tuberosity moves medial to the second toe or 2 points if the tibial tuberosity 
moves past the medial longitudinal arch of the foot, and (e) 1 point if the affected limb wavers from side to side. Total quality-of-movement scores are inter -
preted as follows: 0 to 1, good; 2 to 3, moderate; and 4 or greater, poor.
eA measure of knee valgus formed by a line drawn from the anterior superior iliac spine to the midpoint of the tibiofemoral joint, and another line drawn from 
the midpoint of the tibiofemoral joint to the midpoint of the ankle mortise.
fThe individual steps down anteriorly with one leg from the platform as slowly and with as much control as possible.TABLE 2 Activity Limitations: Physical Performance Measures
Measure/StudyLevel of 
Evidence Intratester Intertester Sensitivity Specificity +LR –LR
Pain with squattinga
Cook et al64I 0.91-0.94 0.46-0.50 1.7-1.8 (1.3, 2.3) 0.1-0.2 (0.1, 0.4)
Pain with stair climbingb
Cook et al64I 0.75-0.94 0.43-0.45 1.3-1.7 (1.0, 1.9) 0.1-0.6 (0.03, 1.1)
Pain with kneelingc
Cook et al63I 0.84 (0.73, 0.92) 0.50 (0.31, 0.69) 1.7 (1.2, 2.4) 0.3 (0.2, 0.6)
Lateral step-down testd
Piva et al230; Rabin et al242; 
Décary et al82III 0.67-0.81 (0.58, 0.94)
Frontal plane projection anglee
Munro et al201II 0.72-0.88
Eccentric step-down testf
Nunes et al215I 0.42 (0.25, 0.61) 0.82 (0.62, 0.93) 2.3 (1.9, 2.9) 0.7 (0.6, 0.9)Reliability* Diagnostic Accuracy†
TABLE 3 Physical Impairment Measures
Diagnostic Accuracy*
Measure/Study Intratester Intertester Sensitivity Specificity +LR –LR MDC95
Patellar tilt testa
Watson et al300,301; 
Haim et al126k = 0.28-0.50 k = 0.19-0.71 0.43 (0.31, 0.55) 0.92 (0.75, 0.98) 5.4 (1.4, 20.8) 0.6 (0.5, 0.8)
Patella alta testb
Haim et al1260.49 0.72 1.75 0.71
Compression testc
Cook et al64; Nunes 
et al2150.68-0.83 (0.54, 0.92) 0.18-0.54 (0.06, 0.72) 1.0-1.5 (0.8, 2.3) 0.6-1.0 (0.3, 3.6)
Waldron test: phase 1d
Nijs et al2100.45 (0.28, 0.64) 0.68 (0.48, 0.83) 1.4 (0.6, 3.2) 0.8 (0.4, 1.8)
Waldron test: phase 2e
Nijs et al2100.23 (0.10, 0.42) 0.79 (0.59, 0.91) 1.1 (1.0, 1.1) 1.0 (0.9, 1.1)
Patellar grind test 
(Clarke’s sign)fReliability* Diagnostic Accuracy*
T able continues on page CPG31.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg31
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesTABLE 3 Physical Impairment Measures (continued)
Diagnostic Accuracy*
Measure/Study Intratester Intertester Sensitivity Specificity +LR –LR MDC95
Nijs et al2100.48 (0.31, 0.67) 0.75 (0.55, 0.89) 1.9 (1.1, 3.6) 0.7 (0.4, 1.3)
Passive gliding patella: 
medial/lateralg
Sweitzer et al275κ = 0.59 (0.42, 0.72) 0.54 (0.47 , 0.59) 0.69 (0.52, 0.83) 1.8 (0.9, 3.6) 0.7 (0.5, 1.0)
Passive gliding patella: 
superior/inferiorg
Sweitzer et al275κ = 0.55 (0.37 , 0.69) 0.63 (0.56, 0.69) 0.56 (0.39, 0.72) 1.4 (0.9, 2.5) 0.7 (0.4, 1.1)
Lateral pull testh
Watson et al300; Haim 
et al126κ = 0.39-0.47 κ = 0.31 0.25 (0.17 , 0.37) 1.00 (0.87 , 1.00) Unable to calculate 
due to specificity 
of 1.000.8 (0.6, 0.9)
Patellar inferior pole 
testi
Sweitzer et al275κ = 0.48 (0.27 , 0.61) 0.19 (0.13, 0.22) 0.83 (0.68, 0.93) 1.1 (0.4, 3.0) 0.9 (0.8, 1.3)
Vastus medialis coordi -
nation testj
Nijs et al2100.16 (0.06, 0.35) 0.93 (0.75, 0.99) 2.26 (1.9, 2.9) 0.90 (0.6, 0.98)
Foot Posture Indexk
Cornwall et al66ICC = 0.92-0.93 ICC = 0.52-0.65
Barton et al16ICC = 0.88-0.93 (0.67 , 
0.99)ICC = 0.79-0.88 (0.47 , 
0.96)
Midfoot width: weight 
bearingl
McPoil et al192ICC = 0.98-0.99 ICC = 0.99 (0.98, 1.00) 0.14 cm
Midfoot width: non–
weight bearingl
McPoil et al192ICC = 0.97-0.98 ICC = 0.97 (0.95, 0.98) 0.31 cm
Navicular dropm
Piva et al230; Barton 
et al16ICC = 0.87-0.93 (0.55, 
0.98)ICC = 0.78-0.81 (0.34, 
0.94)
Hip Stability Isometric 
Te s tn
Almeida et al4ICC = 0.98-0.99 (0.97 , 
0.99)ICC = 0.98 (0.97 , 0.99) 0.034-0.036 kg 
of force/kg 
of BW
MVIC quadriceps 
strength testingo
Logerstedt et al183,184ICC = 0.97-0.98
Hamstrings length: 
knee extension 
anglep
Gajdosik and Lus -
tin109; Gajdosik et 
al110; Davis et al79ICC = 0.94 0.99 >20° indicated 
hamstrings 
muscle tight -
ness
Quadriceps lengthq
Piva et al230ICC = 0.91 (0.80, 0.96) 10.53°
Gastrocnemius/ soleus 
lengthr
Piva et al230; Barton 
et al16ICC = 0.38-0.92 (0.12, 
0.96)ICC = 0.29-0.76 (–0.18, 
0.92)4.43°Reliability* Diagnostic Accuracy*
T able continues on page CPG32.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg32   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAbbreviations: BW, body weight; ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; –LR, negative likelihood ratio; +LR, positive likelihood ratio; MDC95, minimum detect -
able change at the 95% confidence level; MVIC, maximum voluntary isometric contraction.
*Values in parentheses are 95% confidence interval.
aThe individual is supine, with knees extended. The therapist attempts to tilt the lateral aspect of the patella beyond the horizontal position, using the thumbs 
on the lateral patellar border and the index fingers on the medial patellar border. The test is performed by moving the patella out of the trochlear groove later -
ally so that the anterior patella faces slightly medial.
bThe individual is supine, with knees extended. The therapist compresses the inferior pole of the patella while flexing the knee.
cThe individual is in a supine position, and the therapist pushes the patella directly into the femoral trochlea.
dThe individual is in a supine position, and the therapist pushes the patella against the femur with one hand while passively flexing the knee with the opposite hand.
eThe individual is in a standing position, and the therapist gently pushes the patella against the femur with one hand while the patient slowly performs a full squat.
fThe individual is supine, with the knee in slight flexion (not full extension, as this is reported to possibly cause pinching of the suprapatellar pouch). The clini -
cian glides the patella inferiorly and the individual contracts the quadriceps muscles.
gThe individual is supine, with knees extended. The therapist glides the patella superiorly/inferiorly and medially/laterally.
hThe individual is in a supine position, with the therapist stabilizing the test extremity in a neutral position, with the knee at 0° to 15° of flexion. The indi -
vidual performs an isometric quadriceps muscle contraction while the therapist observes the movement of the patella, with and without slight pressure to the 
superior aspect of the patella.
iThe individual is supine, with knees extended. The therapist applies posteriorly directed pressure to the superior patella to tilt the patella anteriorly at its 
inferior pole.
jThe individual is supine, with knee extended. The therapist places a fist under the knee of interest and the individual then slowly extends the knee to full end-
range extension.
kThe individual stands in a relaxed-stance position on both legs and is instructed to stand still, with arms by the side and looking straight ahead. The assessor 
needs to be able to move around the individual during the assessment and to have uninterrupted access to the posterior aspect of the leg and foot. If an observa -
tion cannot be made (eg, because of soft tissue swelling), indicate on the data sheet that the item was not scored. A 5-point Likert-type scale, where lower scores 
represent a more supinated foot position and higher scores represent a more pronated position, is used.
lThe individual stands in a relaxed-stance position on both legs. A caliper is used to measure the width of the midfoot at the point of 50% of the total foot length. 
Following weight-bearing measurements, the individual is seated on the end of a table so that both lower legs hang in a perpendicular position to the floor, with 
the feet non–weight bearing and the ankles slightly plantar flexed. In this position, the non–weight-bearing measurements of midfoot width are recorded.
mThe individual is in weight bearing and the subtalar joint is positioned in a neutral position, based on the clinician’s palpation. The distance from the floor to 
the navicular tubercle is then measured. The patient then relaxes from this position (ie, relaxed calcaneal stance) and the measure is repeated. The difference in 
distance from the navicular tubercle to the floor in both positions represents the amount of navicular drop.
nThe individual is sidelying, with both legs positioned at 45° of hip flexion and 90° of knee flexion, with the limb to be tested superior to the opposite limb. The 
individual is instructed to lift the knee of the superior leg while keeping the heels in contact, so that the hip is in 20° of hip abduction. The dynamometer is 
laterally positioned 5 cm above the lateral tibiofemoral joint line. To ensure that the individual is exerting a maximal effort, he or she is familiarized with the 
procedure and receives verbal encouragement from the tester.
oThe individual is seated, with hips and knees in 90° of flexion. The distal tibia is secured to the dynamometer force arm just proximal to the lateral malleolus, 
and rigid straps are used to stabilize the thigh and pelvis. The axis of rotation is adjusted to align with the lateral epicondyle of the femur. To ensure that the 
individual is exerting a maximal effort, he or she is familiarized with the procedure and receives verbal encouragement from the tester and visual feedback from 
the dynamometer’s real-time force display. The individual performs 3 practice trials, and testing is initiated after 5 minutes of rest. For the test, the individual 
is instructed to maximally contract his or her quadriceps for 5 seconds. To avoid the influence of fatigue, the individual is given 2 to 3 minutes of rest between 
trials. A quadriceps index is calculated as a strength test score after testing is completed: (involved-side maximum force/uninvolved-side maximum force) × 100.
pThe individual assumes a supine position on a mat table, with the hip of the tested leg flexed to 90° and the contralateral limb flush on the mat table. The knee 
of the tested leg is flexed to 90°. The clinician then extends the knee to the maximum position, per the patient’s tolerance. The stationary arm of the goniom -
eter is aligned with the greater trochanter. The axis of the goniometer is aligned with the lateral epicondyle of the knee. The movable arm of the goniometer is 
aligned with the lateral malleolus of the ankle. An additional measurement method is to use an inclinometer, which is zeroed on a horizontal surface prior to 
the measurement.
qThe individual assumes a prone position. The ipsilateral knee is passively flexed to the maximum position, per the patient’s tolerance, and anterior tilt of the 
pelvis and/or extension of the lumbar spine is avoided. The stationary arm of the goniometer is aligned with the greater trochanter. The axis of the goniometer 
is aligned with the lateral epicondyle of the knee. The movable arm of the goniometer is aligned with the lateral malleolus of the ankle. An additional measure -
ment method is to use an inclinometer, which is zeroed on a horizontal surface prior to the measurement.
rThe individual assumes a supine position on a mat table, with the ankle and foot suspended over the edge of the table and the ankle dorsiflexed in a subtalar 
joint neutral position. The stationary arm of the goniometer is aligned with the fibular head. The axis of the goniometer is placed just distal to the lateral mal -
leolus. The movable arm of the goniometer is aligned parallel with the plantar aspect of the calcaneus and fifth metatarsal. To measure gastrocnemius length, 
the knee is extended to 0° and a measurement of ankle dorsiflexion is recorded. To measure soleus length, the knee is flexed to 45° and a measurement of ankle 
dorsiflexion is recorded.
sThe individual assumes a sidelying position on a mat table, with the pelvis, trunk, and shoulders aligned in the vertical plane. The tested leg is positioned 
superiorly and the ipsilateral knee flexed to 90°. The clinician stabilizes the pelvis with the proximal hand while the inferior hand grasps just inferior to the 
knee. The clinician moves the individual’s ipsilateral hip first in flexion, then through abduction and extension, until the hip is positioned in midrange abduc -
tion and neutral flexion and extension. The clinician then lowers the thigh into adduction (toward the table) until the thigh stops moving. A positive test is 
indicated when the thigh remains in an abducted position (above the horizontal) when the hip abductor muscles are not contracting. An additional measure -
ment method is to use an inclinometer, which is zeroed on a horizontal surface prior to the measurement.TABLE 3 Physical Impairment Measures (continued)
Diagnostic Accuracy*
Measure/Study Intratester Intertester Sensitivity Specificity +LR –LR MDC95
Iliotibial band length 
(Ober test)s
Piva et al230ICC = 0.97 (0.93, 0.98) 5.82°Reliability* Diagnostic Accuracy*
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg33
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAbbreviations:–LR, negative likelihood ratio; +LR, positive likelihood ratio; NPV, negative predictive value; PFP, patellofemoral pain; PPV, positive predic -
tive value.
*Values in parentheses are 95% confidence interval.TABLE 4 Patellofemoral Pain Cluster of Findings81*
Sensitivity Specificity PPV +LR NPV –LR
T wo clusters in diagnosis of PFP
Cluster 1 0.64 (0.52, 0.75) 0.93 (0.88, 0.96) 0.76 (0.64, 0.86) 8.70 (5.20, 14.58)
Aged <40 y
AND
Isolated anterior knee pain
OR
Medial patellar facet tenderness
Cluster 2
Aged 40-58 y
AND
Isolated anterior or diffuse knee pain
AND
Mild to moderate difficulty descending stairs
AND
Medial patellar facet tenderness
AND
Full passive knee extension
Three clusters to exclude PFP
Cluster 1 0.92 (0.83, 0.97) 0.65 (0.58, 0.71) 0.96 (0.91, 0.98) 0.12 (0.06, 0.27)
Aged <58 y
AND
Medial, lateral, or posterior knee pain
AND
No medial or lateral patellar facet tenderness
Cluster 2
Aged <58 y
AND
Diffuse or lateral knee pain
AND
Medial or lateral patellar facet tenderness
AND
Restricted passive knee extension
Cluster 3
Aged ≥58 y
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg34   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesINTRODUCTION
The literature on nonsurgical interventions for individu -
als with PFP includes individual and combined interven -
tions. The goal of trunk, hip, thigh, and lower extremity 
strengthening and stretching exercises is to address muscle 
performance deficits, movement coordination deficits, and 
mobility impairments. Exercise therapies consist of knee- 
and/or hip-targeted exercises performed in weight-bearing 
or non–weight-bearing positions, or both. Due to the het -
erogeneous nature and combination of multiple interven -
tions for the treatment of individuals with PFP, results are 
often provided based on combined interventions. Combined 
interventions consist of 3 or more adjunctive interventions, 
such as foot orthoses, manual therapy, or patellar taping, 
with exercise therapy. Finally, adjunctive interventions such 
as biophysical agents, gait retraining, and dry needling were 
reviewed in isolation from exercise therapies when possible.
Each body of evidence was synthesized separately and then 
overall to support the overarching recommendation for each 
intervention. To maintain consistency with the most recent 
international expert consensus meeting on the treatment of 
PFP published in 2016,75 systematic reviews and RCTs were 
assigned levels of evidence. These levels of evidence corre -
sponded with the respective AMSTAR and Physiotherapy 
Evidence Database (PEDro) scores: high quality (7/10 or 
greater), moderate quality (4-6/10), and low quality (3/10 
or less). Studies were assessed for outcomes in the short 
term (less than 3 months), medium term (3-12 months), 
and long term (greater than 12 months), as described by 
Lack et al.168
SPECIFIC MODES OF EXERCISE THERAPY 
COMPARED WITH CONTROL
IA high-quality systematic review identified 38 level 
I and level II studies supporting combined inter -
ventions of exercise therapy, consisting of knee-
targeted exercise therapy or knee- and hip-targeted exercise 
therapy, combined with foot orthoses, patellar taping, patel -
lar mobilization, and/or vasti biofeedback for the treatment 
of PFP compared with no care or with placebo.143 Four ad -
ditional systematic reviews also support the use of combined 
interventions for the treatment of PFP.54,164,168,289 Further, a 
2016 Cochrane review concluded that exercise therapy re -
duces pain (SMD, –1.46; 95% CI: –2.39, –0.54) and improves 
function (SMD, 1.62; 95% CI: 0.31, 2.94) with moderate to large effect sizes, when compared with control or sham thera -
pies, in the short term.290 In the medium to long term, exer -
cise therapy results in large reductions in usual pain (SMD, 
4.32; 95% CI: 0.89, 7.75) and large improvements in function 
(SMD, 1.1; 95% CI: 0.58, 1.63) in individuals with PFP, when 
compared with control or sham therapies.290
Gaps in Knowledge
Although exercise therapy is recommended for PFP to reduce 
pain in the short, medium, and long term, and to improve 
function in the medium and long term, optimal dosage is 
currently unclear, in part due to inadequate exercise report -
ing in the literature.143 Further research is needed to under -
stand which dosage parameters (eg, session duration and 
frequency, exercise intensity, etc) are associated with better 
pain, function, and quality-of-life outcomes.
Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy
Non–Weight Bearing (Open Chain) Versus Weight Bearing 
(Closed Chain)
Evidence suggests that weight-bearing and non–weight-bear -
ing quadriceps-strengthening exercises result in differential 
patterns of PFJ loading.98,239 Therefore, non–weight-bearing 
and weight-bearing exercises each have theoretical advantag -
es and disadvantages that may influence a patient’s response.
Short-term Outcomes
IITwo moderate-quality RCTs have compared short-
term outcomes in individuals with PFP who com -
pleted programs of either non–weight-bearing or 
weight-bearing knee-targeted exercises. In a moderate-qual -
ity RCT, Herrington and Al-Sherhi135 reported equivalent 
reductions in pain and improvement in function at 6 weeks 
in individuals who completed weight-bearing versus non–
weight-bearing knee-targeted exercises. Most importantly, 
both weight-bearing and non–weight-bearing knee-targeted 
exercises were superior to control (wait and see).135
Similarly, a moderate-quality RCT by Bakhtiary and Fatemi14 
reported large pain reductions in individuals with PFP who 
completed a 6-week program of either non–weight-bearing 
or weight-bearing knee-targeted (quadriceps-strengthening) 
exercises, with no differences between the 2 exercise modes. 
Bakhtiary and Fatemi14 did not include a no-intervention 
control group, and therefore it is unclear whether findings of 
pain reductions in either exercise group would exceed “wait 
and see.”CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Interventions
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg35
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesMedium-term Outcomes
IIIn the medium term, a moderate-quality RCT by 
Witvrouw et al314 reported that 5 months of weight-
bearing knee-targeted exercise resulted in only 
slightly greater reductions in pain, rated on a VAS, in individu -
als with PFP compared with those treated with non–weight-
bearing knee-targeted exercise. They reported no differences 
in functional outcomes between the 2 groups in the medium 
term.314 However, it should be noted that there was no control 
group. Therefore, it is unclear whether medium-term out -
comes for either weight-bearing or non–weight-bearing knee-
targeted exercises are greater than “wait and see.”
Long-term Outcomes
IFive-year outcomes from a high-quality RCT312 re-
ported that while both non–weight-bearing and 
weight-bearing exercises reduced PFP, neither was 
superior. At the 5-year follow-up, slightly higher functional 
scores on the AKPS were reported in those treated with non–
weight-bearing exercises.
Gaps in Knowledge
While neither weight-bearing nor non–weight-bearing 
knee-targeted exercise therapy demonstrated superiority 
compared to one another in the short, medium, and long 
term,132,164,250,289 it is not yet known whether either is superior 
to control in the medium and long term.
High Versus Low Volume of Knee- T argeted 
Exercise Therapy While Avoiding Pain
IIA single moderate-quality RCT reported greater 
short- and medium-to-long-term reductions in pain 
and improvements in function with the step-down 
test using a high-volume (3 sets of 30 or more repetitions, 3 
times per week for 12 weeks), knee-targeted exercise therapy 
program (deloaded, unweighted) that avoided any pain exacer -
bation; it was coupled with 30 minutes of aerobic cycling and 
compared with a low-volume exercise program (3 sets of 10 rep -
etitions, 3 times per week for 12 weeks) that also avoided pain 
exacerbation and included 10 minutes of aerobic cycling.217,218,289
Gaps in Knowledge
The cited evidence to support high-volume exercise is from 
a single cohort and lacked a control group of wait and see. 
Thus, additional research is needed to make a definitive 
recommendation regarding high- versus low-volume knee-
targeted exercise therapy.
Hip- T argeted Exercise Therapy Compared With Control
Short-term Outcomes
IIA single moderate-quality RCT compared a group 
that received 8 weeks of non–weight-bearing, hip-
targeted exercise therapy utilizing elastic bands to a group that received a control therapy of nutritional supple -
mentation for the treatment of PFP.159 In the short term, large 
reductions in pain (SMD, 2.80; 95% CI: 1.71, 3.88) and im -
provements in function on the WOMAC (SMD, 2.88; 95% 
CI: 1.78, 3.98) were reported for the hip-targeted exercise 
therapy group when compared with the control.
Gaps in Knowledge
Due to the moderate quality of evidence supporting hip-tar -
geted exercise therapy compared with control, further high-
quality RCTs evaluating the efficacy of hip-targeted exercise 
therapy in the medium and long term, along with consider -
ation of optimal dosage parameters, may allow a more defini -
tive recommendation.
Hip- T argeted Exercise Therapy Compared 
With Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy
Short-term Outcomes
IA high-quality RCT assessed an 8-week interven -
tion of hip-targeted exercises compared with knee-
targeted exercises and reported superior outcomes 
for pain and function in the group that completed the hip-
targeted exercises.84 It should be noted that weight-bearing 
exercises, including leg presses, step-downs/step-ups, and 
squats, were considered, in addition to resisted non–weight-
bearing knee extension exercises, to be knee-targeted exer -
cises. Indeed, these weight-bearing exercises result in high 
levels of gluteal activity.251 The hip-targeted exercise group 
completed exercises that included non–weight-bearing hip-
strengthening exercises but also several weight-bearing exer -
cises, such as the SLS and lunges, that have previously been 
reported to result in high levels of quadriceps muscle activity 
(greater than 50% to 60% maximal voluntary isometric 
contraction).26,104
IIn a high-quality RCT,3 individuals with PFP ran -
domized to 4 weeks of isolated hip-targeted exer -
cise therapy prior to 4 weeks of isolated 
knee-targeted exercise therapy experienced greater improve -
ments in hopping performance and functional scores (via the 
Kujala questionnaire) compared with individuals who re -
ceived 4 weeks of knee-targeted exercise therapy prior to 4 
weeks of hip-targeted exercise therapy. Regardless of group 
assignment, all exercises were performed for 3 sets of 10 rep -
etitions at 60% of 10-repetition maximum.
ITwo high-quality meta-analyses found small short-
term effects favoring hip-targeted exercises over 
knee-targeted exercises for improving pain (SMD, 
0.36; 95% CI: 0.13, 0.59) and function (SMD, 0.18; 95% CI: 
0.05, 0.42) in individuals with PFP.168,289 Caution is urged, as 
these meta-analyses included the studies by Ferber et al105 
and de Marche Baldon et al84 as hip-targeted exercises versus 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg36   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesulations, in particular high-demand athletes and adolescents, 
as nothing is known about the effectiveness of hip-targeted 
versus knee-targeted exercise therapy for PFP treatment 
in these population subsets. Finally, greater consistency in 
the delineation of hip-targeted exercise therapy and knee-
targeted exercise therapy will assist with interpretation and 
implementation of results from future clinical trials.
Combined Hip- and Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy 
Compared With Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy Alone
Short-term Outcomes
ICompared with knee-targeted exercise therapy, 3 
high-quality meta-analyses agree that the combina -
tion of hip- and knee-targeted exercise therapy re -
sulted in better outcomes in the short term.168,204,289 
Specifically, 1 meta-analysis found small effects favoring com -
bined hip- and knee-targeted exercises compared with knee-
targeted exercises with respect to usual pain (SMD, 0.55; 
95% CI: 0.22, 0.59) and patient-reported function (SMD, 
0.42; 95% CI: 0.03, 0.81).168 However, it is noteworthy that 
the majority of the RCTs included in the meta-analyses did 
not control for exercise volume in the respective knee-target -
ed and combined hip- and knee-targeted exercise protocols. 
Therefore, the differences in patient outcomes may be due to 
greater exercise volume in the combined hip- and knee-tar -
geted exercise protocols.
Medium-term Outcomes
IBased on 2 high-quality RCTs,90,107 2 high-quality 
meta-analyses reported large effects for pain reduc -
tion in the medium term in favor of combined hip- 
and knee-targeted exercise therapy over knee-targeted 
exercise therapy.168,289 Similarly, these meta-analyses168,289 
reported large effects in favor of combined hip- and knee-
targeted exercise therapy for improvements in patient-re -
ported function, based on 2 high-quality RCTs.90,107 A 
high-quality RCT reported a large effect in favor of combined 
hip- and knee-targeted exercise therapy over knee-only exer -
cise therapy on single-leg hop scores in the medium term 
(SMD, 1.54; 95% CI: 0.89, 2.18).107
Long-term Outcomes
ITo date, only 1 high-quality RCT compared long-
term outcomes for pain, patient-reported function, 
and functional performance between patients who 
received either combined hip- and knee-targeted exercise 
therapy or knee-only targeted exercise therapy. Fukuda et 
al107 reported a large effect in favor of combined hip- and 
knee-targeted exercise therapy over knee-targeted exercise 
alone on pain reduction (SMD, 2.99; 95% CI: 2.16, 3.83), 
patient-reported function on the LEFS (SMD, 2.65; 95% CI: 
1.86, 3.43) and AKPS (SMD, 1.78; 95% CI: 1.12, 2.45), and on 
the single-leg hop test (SMD, 2.1; 95% CI: 1.40, 2.79).knee-targeted exercises, despite the confounding nature of 
their respective exercise programs.
IIIn a moderate-quality trial, Ferber et al105 reported 
that 6 weeks of hip-targeted exercises or knee-tar -
geted exercises both reduced pain and improved 
function via AKPS scores in individuals with PFP, but there 
were no differences between the groups. The hip-targeted ex -
ercise group performed standing exercises that used a cable 
column to provide external resistance to the hip abductors and 
hip internal and external rotator musculature. The knee-tar -
geted exercise group performed non–weight-bearing and 
weight-bearing exercises. Non–weight-bearing exercises in -
cluded isometric quadriceps exercises and knee extension ex -
ercises, whereas weight-bearing exercises included step-downs, 
the SLS and double-leg squats, and forward lunges. Care 
should be taken when interpreting the findings,105 as high lev -
els of hip muscle activity (greater than 60% maximal voluntary 
isometric contraction) were previously reported in the weight-
bearing knee exercises used in this study.99,251 No wait-and-see 
control group was included in this study.105
IITwo moderate- and 1 high-quality RCTs compared 
hip exercises that targeted the posterolateral hip 
musculature (eg, sidelying hip abduction) to knee-
targeted exercises that targeted the quadriceps musculature 
(eg, non–weight-bearing knee extension).90,105,158 All 3 studies 
reported that hip-targeted exercise therapy resulted in supe -
rior outcomes relating to pain reduction and improved func -
tion compared with knee-targeted exercise therapy.
In contrast, a moderate-quality RCT31 found improvements 
in pain and function, assessed via a VAS and the AKPS, in 
individuals who received 6 weeks of either knee-targeted 
exercise therapy or hip- and core-targeted exercise therapy. 
However, there were no between-group differences. Because 
a control group was not included, it is unknown whether im -
provements with either exercise protocol were greater than 
“wait and see.”
Medium-term Outcomes
IBased on 2 high-quality RCTs,83,158 a 2015 high-
quality systematic review concluded that hip-tar -
geted exercise resulted in medium effects of greater 
pain reduction (SMD, 1.07; 95% CI: 0.55, 1.59) and PROMs 
(SMD, 0.87; 95% CI: 0.36, 1.37) compared with knee-target -
ed exercise in the medium term.167
Gaps in Knowledge
While short- and medium-term outcomes favor hip-target -
ed exercise therapy over knee-targeted therapy, long-term 
outcomes are currently unknown. Further research should 
include evaluation of long-term outcomes across diverse pop -
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg37
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesterm.15,42,60,274 Specifically, systematic reviews have reported 
no benefit, conflicting evidence, and large positive benefits 
of patellar taping for pain.15,42 The inconsistencies relate to 
different meta-analysis processes and definitions of time 
points, types of taping (tailored and untailored), and subse -
quent pooling. For example, Callaghan and Selfe’s42 Co-
chrane review reported no benefit from taping, but defined 
“short term” as 3 months or less and pooled findings of vari -
ous taping techniques and time points from 1 week to 3 
months. Collins et al60 and Barton et al15 considered taping 
techniques and time points separately. Both reviews report -
ed limited evidence from 1 high-quality study305 indicating 
that tailored patellar taping combined with exercise pro -
duces large reductions in pain (effect size unable to be esti -
mated, as the taping group was pain free) in the short term 
(4 weeks). Additionally, these reviews reported limited evi -
dence from 1 high-quality study53 that combining medially 
directed, untailored taping does not provide any additional 
benefit to exercise and education, or education alone. Tap -
ing applied with the aim of enhancing muscle function does 
not provide any benefits in relation to pain and function 
when combined with exercise therapy.15
IIA 2018 moderate-quality RCT reported no added 
improvements in pain or function when patellar 
taping was combined with intensive physical ther -
apy (12 sessions over 4 weeks), including knee-targeted exer -
cise and manual therapy.114 However, interpretation of how 
to apply these findings is challenging because taping methods 
were poorly described in this study.
IIA 2017 moderate-quality RCT reported equivalent 
outcomes for pain or function after comparing su -
pervised exercise therapy targeting the hip and 
knee (12 sessions over 6 weeks), when combined with taping 
to facilitate medial quadriceps activity, to sham taping and 
no taping.123
Gaps in Knowledge
Although tailored patellar taping in conjunction with exer -
cise therapy appears to improve outcomes in the short term 
for individuals with PFP, long-term evaluation of taping ap -
proaches for PFP is needed.
Recommendation
BClinicians may use tailored patellar taping in com -
bination with exercise therapy to assist in immedi -
ate pain reduction, and to enhance outcomes of 
exercise therapy in the short term (4 weeks). Importantly, 
taping techniques may not be beneficial in the longer term or 
when added to more intensive physical therapy. Taping ap -
plied with the aim of enhancing muscle function is not 
recommended.Gaps in Knowledge
More high-quality RCTs are needed in specialized popula -
tions, such as high-demand athletes or adolescents, and to 
determine optimal dosage parameters for combined hip- and 
knee-targeted exercise. Future RCTs should also match exer -
cise volume between knee-targeted and combined hip- and 
knee-targeted exercise programs.
Recommendation
AClinicians should include exercise therapy with 
combined hip- and knee-targeted exercises in the 
treatment of individuals with PFP to reduce pain 
and improve patient-reported outcomes and functional per -
formance in the short, medium, and long term. Hip-target -
ed exercise therapy should target the posterolateral hip 
musculature. Knee-targeted exercise therapy includes ei -
ther weight-bearing (resisted squats) or non–weight-bear -
ing (resisted knee extension) exercise, as both exercise 
techniques target the knee musculature. Preference to hip-
targeted exercise over knee-targeted exercise may be given 
in the early stages of treatment of PFP. Overall, the combi -
nation of hip- and knee-targeted exercises is preferred over 
solely knee-targeted exercises to optimize outcomes in pa -
tients with PFP.
Patellar T aping
Many taping protocols for individuals with PFP have been 
proposed and evaluated in the literature, with each aimed 
at altering PFJ kinematics to reduce PFJ stress.67 Common 
methods include the tailored McConnell taping technique, 
where rigid taping is applied with the aim of reducing any 
combination of lateral patellar glide, tilt, and rotation,67 
to reduce pain during a functional task (eg, step-down) 
during the clinical consultation. Other common methods 
include untailored medial patellar glide–only taping156 and 
taping aimed at enhancing vastii muscle activation and 
synergy.176
IPooled data from 6 high-quality studies indicate 
that tailored patellar taping provides large reduc -
tions in pain (SMD, 2.43; 95% CI: 1.98, 2.89) dur -
ing a range of functional tasks in the immediate term.15 
Specifically, tailored patellar taping involves a combination 
of techniques to support patellar tilt, glide, and rotation, tai -
lored to optimize pain outcomes during a functional task (eg, 
step-down). Pooled data from 3 high-quality studies indicate 
that untailored medially directed taping (ie, 1 strip of tape) 
produces immediate, small pain reductions (SMD, 0.50; 95% 
CI: 0.22, 0.79) during functional tasks.
IThere are conflicting findings from 4 high-quality 
systematic reviews regarding the potential value 
of patellar taping beyond the immediate 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg38   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesCI: 2.7, 46.9). Vicenzino et al296 reported that the presence of 
any 3 of the following 4 predictors (age greater than 25 years, 
midfoot-width difference greater than 10.96 mm, height less 
than 165 cm, and worst pain on a VAS less than 53.25/100 
mm) increased the likelihood of success for foot orthoses for 
PFP by 8.8 times (95% CI: 1.2, 66.9).
IIn 2 high-quality RCTs, prefabricated foot orthoses 
modified to optimize comfort were reported to pro -
vide greater global improvement in patients with 
PFP when compared to flat inserts at 6 weeks.56,196 However, 
one of these high-quality studies indicated that there was no 
clear benefit of adding prefabricated foot orthoses to a com -
bined physical therapy program over a combined physical 
therapy program alone in the short (6 weeks), medium (12 
weeks), or long (52 weeks) term.56
IA 2018 high-quality RCT indicated that in a sub -
group of people with PFP and excessive static rear -
foot eversion (greater than 6°), supervised 
foot-targeted exercises (12 sessions over 3 months) and cus -
tomized foot orthoses, combined with 3 sessions of physical 
therapy (education, manual therapy, and knee-targeted exer -
cises), produced superior pain and function outcomes at 4 
months compared with 3 sessions of physical therapy alone.197 
No between-group differences were found at 12 months. Due 
to the study design, it is unclear whether superior outcomes 
were the result of the additional foot-targeted exercise, foot 
orthoses, or additional extensive physical therapy contact.
IIA moderate-quality systematic review of 7 studies 
involving 700 participants (76.8% female) reported 
that, despite limited evidence, prefabricated foot 
orthoses, as compared with flat inserts, provided greater 
short-term (6 weeks) improvements in function as measured 
by self-reported outcomes and global improvement scores.23 
The addition of physical therapy interventions to the foot or -
thosis intervention demonstrated significantly greater im -
provements in the FIQ in the short term and in the AKPS in 
the intermediate term.
Gaps in Knowledge
Due to the study design and findings of Mølgaard et al,197 
future research should aim to determine whether custom -
ized foot orthoses, coupled with supervised foot-targeted 
exercises, are superior to education, manual therapy, and 
knee-targeted exercise therapy in the short and medium 
term, provided that the dosage of physical therapy is matched 
between interventions. None of the clinical prediction studies 
have been validated with appropriate follow-up methodology, 
indicating that further work is necessary before guidance on 
who is most likely to benefit from foot orthoses can be pro -
vided to help guide clinical practice.Patellofemoral Knee Orthoses (Bracing)
IComparing patellofemoral knee orthoses (knee 
brace, sleeve, or a patellar strap) plus exercise ther -
apy versus exercise therapy alone, a high-quality 
2015 Cochrane review267 concluded that patellofemoral knee 
orthoses did not have a meaningful effect on pain in the short 
term (mean difference, –0.46; 95% CI: –1.16, 0.24). The Co -
chrane review noted the very low quality of evidence and 
heterogeneity of the types of braces (knee brace, sleeve, and 
strap) across the various studies.267
Gaps in Knowledge
Considering the low quality of research on patellofemoral 
knee orthoses, further high-quality clinical trials are needed 
to compare the impact of different types of braces on pain 
and functional outcomes when combined with exercise.
Recommendation
BClinicians should not use patellofemoral knee or -
thoses, including braces, sleeves, or straps, for the 
treatment of individuals with PFP.
Foot Orthoses
The presence of excessive static or dynamic foot pronation has 
traditionally been the rationale for prescribing foot orthoses 
for individuals with PFP122; however, the results are inconsis -
tent. Some studies indicate a likelihood of success with signs 
of greater dynamic pronation22 or foot mobility,21,196,273,296 some 
report success with signs of less foot mobility,21,196,273,296 and 
others report success unrelated to foot posture and mobil -
ity.21,196,273,296 Based on moderate- and high-quality systematic 
reviews and panel voting, the 2016 international expert con -
sensus meeting75 concluded that prescribing prefabricated foot 
orthoses may be useful for short-term pain reduction.
IA high-quality Cochrane review of 2 studies involv -
ing 210 participants reported that foot orthoses 
resulted in better improvements in knee pain (risk 
ratio = 1.48; 95% CI: 1.11, 1.99) compared with flat orthoses 
at the 6-week time point, but not at 1-year follow-up.145 The 
combination of physical therapy and foot orthosis interven -
tion demonstrated no significantly greater improvements in 
PROMs than physical therapy alone at any time point.
IA high-quality systematic review by Matthews et 
al189 reported 14 factors associated with a successful 
outcome after foot orthosis treatment across 6 
studies. Barton et al21 reported that the presence of any 3 of 
4 predictors (footwear motion-control properties greater 
than 5.0, usual pain on a VAS less than 22.0/100 mm, weight-
bearing ankle dorsiflexion ROM less than 41.3° with the knee 
flexed, and reduced pain during the SLS) increased the likeli -
hood of success for foot orthoses for PFP by 11.1 times (95% 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg39
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesRunning Gait Retraining
IOne high-quality RCT studied patient education 
focused on load management (avoid running hills 
and reduce run-session volume while increasing 
session frequency) combined with five 10-minute sessions of 
instruction on running modification. The running modifica -
tion education consisted of instruction to increase running 
cadence, reduce audible sound of foot strike, and/or alter foot 
strike from rearfoot to forefoot. However, combining patient 
education on load management with running modification 
was no more effective in the medium term than patient edu -
cation on load management alone for runners with PFP, and 
was no more effective than hip- and knee-targeted exercise 
therapy plus patient education.100 There was no control group 
included in this study. Therefore, it is unknown whether the 
improvements noted with the 3 interventions exceeded “wait 
and see.”
IIIn a moderate-quality RCT, 8 sessions of gait re -
training over 2 weeks in rearfoot-strike runners, 
consisting of cuing to alter foot strike from rearfoot 
to forefoot using a faded-feedback design, were more effec -
tive at reducing pain immediately following the conclusion of 
the retraining period and at short-term follow-up (4 weeks) 
compared with a control group that received a graded in -
crease in running volume matching the gait retraining 
group.252
IIA moderate-quality RCT reported that runners 
treated with 10 sessions of gait retraining to in -
crease running cadence by 10%, combined with the 
use of minimalist, barefoot-mimicking footwear for 20% of 
running volume, had greater pain reductions compared with 
runners treated with foot orthoses prescribed to optimize 
comfort.35
IIIA 2016 systematic review based on 2 moderate-
quality case series212,309 concluded that 8 sessions of 
gait retraining using visual feedback and a faded-
feedback design on what were deemed to be excessive proxi -
mal running mechanics (ie, peak hip adduction) during 
running resulted in large reductions in pain as assessed with 
a VAS (SMD, 3.84; 95% CI: 2.70, 4.98), with concurrent 
large increases in function as measured by the LEFS (SMD, 
2.16; 95% CI: 1.29, 3.03).206
Gaps in Knowledge
Further research should include comparisons of running gait 
retraining, patient education, and hip- and knee-targeted ex -
ercise therapy, with an adequate length of interventions and 
long-term follow-up. It should be determined whether gait 
retraining needs to be targeted to a specific running mecha -
nism thought to contribute to the etiology of PFP, or whether Recommendation
AClinicians should prescribe prefabricated foot or -
thoses for those with greater than normal prona -
tion to reduce pain in individuals with PFP, but 
only in the short term (up to 6 weeks). If prescribed, foot 
orthoses should be combined with an exercise therapy pro -
gram. There is insufficient evidence to recommend custom 
foot orthoses over prefabricated foot orthoses.
Biofeedback
EMG-Based Biofeedback-Assisted Knee Exercise Therapy
IIElectromyography-based biofeedback has been pro -
posed to encourage preferential recruitment of the 
medial vastii musculature to reduce lateral patello -
femoral tracking in individuals with PFP.180 Two moderate-
quality RCTs have examined whether EMG-based biofeedback 
can improve therapeutic outcomes in individuals with PFP; 
both reported no added benefit over knee-targeted (quadri -
ceps) exercise alone.94,321 Subsequent low- and high-quality 
meta-analyses concluded that biofeedback-assisted quadriceps 
exercise therapy had no added benefit over knee-targeted 
(quadriceps) exercise therapy alone for the treatment of PFP. 
Because there was no control group in these studies, it is not 
possible to determine whether the knee-targeted exercise pro -
grams used in these studies were superior to wait and see.60,169,299
Recommendation
BClinicians should not use EMG-based biofeed -
back on medial vastii activity to augment knee-
targeted (quadriceps) exercise therapy for the 
treatment of PFP.
Hip- and Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy Completed With 
Visual Biofeedback Compared With Hip- and Knee- T argeted 
Exercise Therapy in the Absence of Visual Biofeedback
Short-term and Medium-term Outcomes
IA single high-quality RCT found that improvements 
in reported pain and function (assessed via the AKPS) 
were noted after 4 weeks of rehabilitation and at 3 
and 6 months post rehabilitation in individuals with PFP, re -
gardless of whether visual biofeedback on lower extremity 
alignment was provided during combined hip and knee exer -
cises, such as the SLS.90 Furthermore, there were no differences 
in trunk and lower extremity mechanics between the 2 treat -
ment groups during a single-leg step-down task after rehabilita -
tion was completed. Last, while both groups exhibited increased 
posterolateral hip and quadriceps isometric strength after the 
intervention, there were no differences between groups.
Recommendation
BClinicians should not use visual biofeedback on lower 
extremity alignment during hip- and knee-targeted 
exercises for the treatment of individuals with PFP.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg40   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesdividuals, less active individuals may be at greater risk for 
adverse events, such as rhabdomyolysis.147
Recommendation
FClinicians may use blood flow restriction plus high-
repetition knee exercise therapy, while monitoring 
for adverse events, for those with limiting painful 
resisted knee extension.
Needling Therapies
Two common forms of needling used in practice have been 
evaluated in the literature. These include acupuncture (East -
ern medicine) and dry needling (Western medicine). While 
acupuncture is not practiced by physical therapists in the 
United States, it is practiced by physical therapists in other 
countries, such as the United Kingdom and Australia.
IA single high-quality RCT reported no added im -
provements in patient pain or function after 3 ses -
sions of trigger point dry needling of the vastii 
musculature when combined with knee exercise therapy and 
manual therapy targeting the PFJ.102
IA single high-quality RCT comparing trigger point 
dry needling (6 sites in the quadriceps) to sham 
(same 6 sites using a sharp object with a plastic 
guide tube, but not puncturing the skin) reported no benefit 
of dry needling on pain or disability in individuals with PFP 
immediately or 72 hours following treatment.273
IIA single moderate-quality RCT, synthesized in a 
high-quality systematic review, indicates that acu -
puncture produces a moderate positive effect on 
pain reduction compared to no treatment in the medium 
term (5 months) (SMD, 0.65; 95% CI: 0.13, 1.16).60
Evidence Synthesis and Gaps in Knowledge
Although 1 study points to the effectiveness of acupunc -
ture, this was in comparison to no treatment, highlighting 
the need for a placebo/sham-controlled trial. Additionally, 
acupuncture has not been evaluated in comparison to, or in 
combination with, exercise therapy. Therefore, it is unclear 
whether similar findings to those identified with dry needling 
may occur (ie, no added value to exercise therapy). No stud -
ies have compared acupuncture to dry needling approaches 
in individuals with PFP. These gaps in research should be 
addressed to allow clearer recommendations in relation to 
acupuncture.
Recommendations
AClinicians should not use dry needling for the treat -
ment of individuals with PFP.gait retraining can be applied evenly across runners regard -
less of running mechanics. It is currently unknown which cri -
teria identify patients with PFP who would benefit the most 
from the addition of gait retraining to their rehabilitation 
programs. Because the retraining interventions that resulted 
in a reduction in pain were associated with more intensive re -
training (ie, more retraining sessions), future research should 
also assess optimal dosage of retraining sessions. With the 
majority of this research involving small RCTs (10 per group) 
or case series, it is unclear which gait retraining intervention 
is most effective, and whether it is superior to patient educa -
tion on load management.
Recommendation
CClinicians may use gait retraining consisting of 
multiple sessions of cuing to adopt a forefoot-strike 
pattern (for rearfoot-strike runners), cuing to in -
crease running cadence, or cuing to reduce peak hip adduc -
tion while running for runners with PFP.
Blood Flow Restriction Training Plus High-
Repetition Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy
IA single level I high-quality RCT reported no dif -
ference in Kujala score or worst pain between 
healthy adults with PFP who received 8 weeks of 
standard knee exercise therapy (3 sets of 7 to 10 repetitions 
at approximately 70% of 1-repetition maximum) and those 
who received 8 weeks of blood flow restriction training plus 
high-repetition knee exercise therapy (1 set of 30 repetitions 
or volitional failure, followed by 3 sets of 15 repetitions, all at 
30% of 1-repetition maximum).115 While a significantly great -
er reduction in pain VAS score during ADLs was observed in 
the blood flow restriction group compared with standard 
knee-targeted exercise therapy, between-group differences on 
the VAS did not exceed the MCID (20 mm).58 A subgroup 
analysis revealed that those with painful resisted knee exten -
sion experienced greater increases in quadriceps strength 
with blood flow restriction therapy plus knee exercise therapy 
than did those who received only standard knee exercise 
therapy.
Evidence Synthesis and Gaps in Knowledge
Additional studies are required to make a definitive recom -
mendation regarding the use of blood flow restriction train -
ing in conjunction with high-repetition knee exercise therapy 
for the treatment of individuals with PFP. Future high-quali -
ty RCTs should utilize appropriately powered sample sizes to 
more clearly identify subgroups of people, such as individu -
als with painful resisted knee extension, who may experience 
greater improvements with blood flow restriction training 
and across various demographics. While blood flow restric -
tion therapy appears to be safe and to present no greater risk 
than standard strengthening programs in healthy, active in -
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg41
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesGaps in Knowledge
Low-quality systematic reviews on manual therapy have 
frequently included studies in which the effects of manual 
therapy could not be differentiated from exercise therapy, 
indicating a need for greater stringency with inclusion cri -
teria and methodological design. With most of the current 
evidence relating to single moderate-quality RCTs, further 
high-quality RCTs evaluating the efficacy of combining man -
ual therapy with exercise therapy are needed to allow more 
definitive recommendations.
Evidence Synthesis and Clinical Rationale
Based on evidence from high-quality systematic reviews and 
panel voting, the most recent international expert consensus 
meeting75 concluded that manual therapy, including lumbar, 
knee, or patellofemoral manipulation/mobilization, may 
not improve outcomes, particularly when used in isolation. 
Although manual therapy has been used in evidence-based 
combined interventions, its use may not improve outcomes, 
particularly when used in isolation, and thus is not recom -
mended. Because exercise therapy is the consistent com -
ponent in combined intervention studies, manual therapy 
should not reduce the time available to provide appropriate 
exercise therapy in patients with PFP.
Recommendation
AClinicians should not use manual therapy, includ -
ing lumbar, knee, or patellofemoral manipulation/
mobilization, in isolation for patients with PFP.
Biophysical Agents
Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation–Assisted Quadriceps Exer -
cise Therapy Compared With Quadriceps Exercise Therapy Alone
IIA single moderate-quality RCT reported no added 
benefit of neuromuscular electrical stimulation tar -
geting the vastus medialis musculature plus knee-
targeted (quadriceps) exercise therapy when compared to 
exercise therapy alone.27
IIA low-quality systematic review subsequently con -
cluded that neuromuscular electrical stimulation 
does not have any added benefit when combined 
with quadriceps exercise therapy for the treatment of PFP.169
Ultrasound and Other Electrophysical Agents
Based on evidence from low- and moderate-quality system -
atic reviews and panel voting, the 2016 international expert 
consensus meeting75 concluded that ultrasound and other 
electrophysical agents may not improve outcomes.
IIA low-quality systematic review of 12 studies evalu -
ated the use of several different electrophysical 
agents for PFP treatment.169 One low-quality study CClinicians may use acupuncture to reduce pain in 
individuals with PFP. However, caution should be 
exercised with this recommendation, as the superi -
ority of acupuncture over placebo or sham treatments is un -
known. This recommendation should only be incorporated 
in settings where acupuncture is within the scope of practice 
of physical therapy.
Manual Therapy as a Stand-Alone Treatment
A 2018 low-quality systematic review concluded that there 
is no benefit from manual therapy (patellar or lumbar) in 
isolation.150
Patellar mobilization has been combined with other physical 
therapy interventions with reported effectiveness. There is a 
high degree of variance in the practice of manual therapy in 
clinical practice and when evaluated in research, with each 
having different rationales for its use, including improved lo -
cal and remote joint mobility and reduced muscle and fascial 
tension.
IA high-quality RCT reported greater reduction in 
pain following retropatellar and peripatellar isch -
emic pressure (15 sessions) compared to hip mus -
culature ischemic pressure (15 sessions), but no control group 
was included.127
IIA low-quality RCT226 synthesized in 2 systematic 
reviews (1 of high quality and the other of low qual -
ity)60,150 concluded that 2 weeks of treatment with 
medial glides, tilt mobilizations, and local lateral retinacular 
massages did not result in reduced levels of pain when com -
pared with a no-intervention control.
IIA moderate-quality RCT269 synthesized in a high-
quality systematic review60 yielded no benefit by 
adding spinal manipulation to patellar mobiliza -
tion over 4 weeks.
IIA moderate-quality RCT reported greater reduction 
in resting pain when exercise was combined with 
knee mobilization with movement (tibiofemoral) 
compared to exercise combined with an elastic taping 
method.85
IIA moderate-quality RCT reported that the addition 
of 12 patellar taping applications may be more ben -
eficial for reducing pain than 12 sessions of patellar 
mobilization, when combined with an exercise program of 
stretching and combined knee- and hip-targeted exercise.160 
The time frame for delivery of these sessions could not be 
determined.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg42   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesRecommendation
FClinicians may include specific patient education 
on load management, body-weight management 
when appropriate, the importance of adherence to 
active treatments like exercise therapy, biomechanics that are 
thought to contribute to relative overload of the PFJ, the evi -
dence for various treatment options, and kinesiophobia. Pa -
tient education may improve compliance and adherence to 
active management and self-management strategies and is 
unlikely to have adverse effects.
Combined Interventions
Combined interventions consist of combining 3 or more of 
the following interventions: foot orthoses, EMG biofeedback 
for vastii retraining, patellar mobilizations, patellar taping, 
and exercise therapy.
Short-term Outcomes
IBased on 2 high-quality RCTs,57,68 a high-quality 
meta-analysis concluded that 6 weeks of combined 
interventions (knee- and hip-targeted exercise 
therapy combined with directional patellar taping, patellar 
mobilizations, and EMG biofeedback) is superior to placebo 
(sham shoe inserts or sham physical therapy), with moderate 
effects (SMD, 1.08; 95% CI: 0.73, 1.43).60 Exercise therapy 
combined with foot orthoses resulted in significant moderate 
effects for pain reduction compared with foot orthoses 
alone.23,57
Medium-term Outcomes
ICombined interventions, consisting of patellar tap -
ing, EMG biofeedback for the quadriceps muscula -
ture, knee-targeted exercise therapy, patellar 
mobilizations, and lower-limb stretching plus foot orthoses, 
resulted in significant moderate effects for pain reduction 
compared with foot orthoses alone.23,56 In the medium to long 
term, combined interventions that included exercise therapy 
resulted in large reductions in usual pain (SMD, 4.32; 95% 
CI: 0.89, 7.75) and large improvements in function (SMD, 
1.1; 95% CI: 0.58, 1.63) in individuals with PFP compared 
with control or sham therapies.290
Long-term Outcomes
ISix weeks of combined interventions, consisting of 
patellar taping, patellar mobilizations, EMG bio -
feedback for the quadriceps musculature, knee-
targeted exercise therapy, and lower-limb stretching, 
resulted in a moderate treatment effect (SMD, 0.44; 95% 
CI: 0.01, 0.88) with respect to pain compared with placebo 
shoe inserts or foot orthoses at 1-year follow-up.60 Adding 
foot orthoses to the same 6-week combined intervention 
also resulted in a moderate effect (SMD, 0.77; 95% CI: 0.33, 
1.21) compared with placebo at 1-year follow-up. However, evaluated the effects of multimodal interventions (ultrasound 
and ice massage, ice bags, phonophoresis, and iontophoresis) 
on symptoms and thigh muscle strength, functional mea -
sures, and thigh muscle activation; 3 studies evaluated the 
effects of electrical stimulation on pain; and 1 study reported 
on the effects of laser therapy. This review reported no ad -
ditional benefits from these electrophysical agents for the 
management of PFP.
Recommendation
BClinicians should not use biophysical agents, in -
cluding ultrasound, cryotherapy, phonophoresis, 
iontophoresis, electrical stimulation, and therapeu -
tic laser, for the treatment of patients with PFP.
Patient Education
Currently, there is no evidence from RCTs to support the 
benefits of education compared to control, wait and see, 
or in addition to interventions such as exercise therapy 
when treating PFP. Previous investigations evaluating pa -
tient education have used it as a comparison intervention 
or in addition to other interventions like exercise therapy. 
The majority of this research generally indicates that com -
bining exercise therapy with education produces superior 
outcomes to education alone.53,198,247,268,292 However, the 
specifics of education provided in these studies are not 
clear, and, as such, value and quality are unable to be de -
termined. In a recent moderate-quality RCT by Esculier et 
al100 in runners with PFP, education related to load man -
agement alone produced similar outcomes for running-
related pain when compared with education combined 
with 8 weeks of exercise therapy, and education combined 
with running retraining primarily focused on increasing 
cadence. This highlights the potential value of education, 
but more research is needed in this area. Regardless of the 
limited evidence base to support patient education in the 
management of PFP, international experts suggest that it 
may be the key to successful management.18
Gaps in Knowledge
Due to the limited and low quality of evidence available, 
further research is needed to determine the effectiveness of 
patient education for individuals with PFP. It is presently 
unknown whether tailored patient education is superior to 
universal patient education. Recently, it was determined that 
tailored online education delivered every other week was 
more effective than a single session of general education on 
injury prevention strategies for runners136; however, the ef -
fects on risk of PFP were not studied. Thus, the most effective 
frequency and mode of delivery of patient education are also 
in need of further study.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg43
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesthe key signs and symptoms associated with serious patho -
logical knee conditions, continually screen for the presence 
of these conditions throughout treatment, and immediately 
initiate referral to the appropriate medical practitioner when 
a potentially serious medical condition is suspected (Guide 
to Physical Therapist Practice 3.0; http://guidetoptpractice.
apta.org/ ). Medical conditions for which physical therapy is 
not indicated must be considered as possible etiologies of a 
patient’s symptoms.
Component 2
Differential evaluation of musculoskeletal clinical findings 
determines the most relevant physical impairments associat -
ed with the patient’s reported activity limitations and medical 
diagnosis.157 Clusters of these clinical findings are described 
as impairment patterns in the physical therapy literature, 
and are labeled according to the key impairment(s) of body 
function associated with that cluster. The authors propose a 
classification system for PFP, with subcategories named ac -
cording to the primary impairments. These impairment-pat -
tern subcategories for PFP are described in the Diagnosis and 
Classification sections of this CPG. The ICD-10 and primary 
and secondary ICF codes associated with PFP are provided 
in the Methods section of this CPG. These impairment pat -
terns impact the selection of interventions, which focus on 
normalizing the key impairments of body function, which in 
turn should improve the movement and function of the pa -
tient and lessen or alleviate the activity limitations commonly 
reported by the patients who meet the diagnostic criteria of 
that specific pattern. The FIGURE  lists the key clinical findings 
used to rule in or rule out the common impairment patterns 
and their associated medical conditions. Impairment-based 
classification is critical for matching the intervention strat -
egy that is most likely to provide the optimal outcome for 
a patient’s clinical findings.157 However, it is important for 
clinicians to understand that the impairment pattern, the 
most relevant impairments of body function, and the associ -
ated intervention strategies often change during the patient’s 
episode of care. Thus, continual re-evaluation of the patient’s 
response to treatment and the patient’s emerging clinical 
findings is important for providing optimal interventions 
throughout the patient’s episode of care.28
Component 3
Irritability  is a term used by rehabilitation practitioners to 
reflect the tissue’s ability to handle physical stress,190,200 and is 
presumably related to physical status and the extent of injury 
and inflammatory activity that is present. McClure and Mi -
chener190 proposed operational definitions for tissue irritabil -
ity for persons with shoulder pain that could be used to guide 
intensity and selection of interventions. These include high, 
moderate, and low irritability levels, which are characterized 
by pain intensity and disability level, as well as provocation of there were no differences in 1-year outcomes between the 
combined intervention and the combined intervention plus 
foot orthoses.60
Evidence Synthesis
While combined interventions were different across studies, 
exercise therapy was present in all successful combined in -
tervention programs.
Gaps in Knowledge
While investigations demonstrate that combining interven -
tions for the treatment of individuals with PFP is beneficial, 
the best combination of exercise therapy and adjunctive 
treatments is still unclear. It is likely that tailoring various 
components of combined interventions may result in the 
best patient outcomes. As of this guideline, it is yet unknown 
which criteria are most helpful in prescribing an interven -
tion with the fewest components that yields the best patient 
outcomes.
Recommendation
AClinicians should combine physical therapy inter -
ventions for the treatment of individuals with PFP, 
which results in superior outcomes compared with 
no treatment, flat shoe inserts, or foot orthoses alone in the 
short and medium term. Exercise therapy is the critical com -
ponent and should be the focus in any combined intervention 
approach. Interventions to consider combining with exercise 
therapy include foot orthoses, patellar taping, patellar mobi -
lizations, and lower-limb stretching.
DECISION TREE MODEL
A pathoanatomical/medical diagnosis of PFP can provide 
valuable information in describing tissue pathology and may 
assist in nonoperative planning and prognosis. The proposed 
model for examination, diagnosis, and treatment planning 
for patients with PFP uses the following components: (1) 
medical screening, (2) classification of the condition through 
evaluation of clinical findings suggestive of musculoskeletal 
impairments of body functioning (ICF) and associated tis -
sue pathology/disease (ICD), (3) determination of irritability 
stage and psychosocial factors that may impact treatment, (4) 
evaluative outcome measures, and (5) nonoperative interven -
tion strategies. This model is depicted in the FIGURE .
Component 1
Medical screening incorporates the findings of the history 
and physical examination to determine whether the patient’s 
symptoms originate from a condition that requires referral 
to another health care provider. Prior to diagnosing a person 
with PFP, it is necessary to rule out all other possible medical 
conditions that may cause AKP. Clinicians should recognize 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg44   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinessigns and symptoms guide the clinician to classify the pa -
tient with one of the proposed impairment-based categories 
of PFP. Interventions targeting the patient’s impairments are 
listed in the FIGURE  according to the PFP category. Because 
irritability level often reflects the tissue’s ability to accept 
physical stress, clinicians should match the most appropri -
ate intervention strategies to the irritability level of the pa -
tient’s condition.28,157 Additionally, clinicians should consider 
influences from psychosocial factors9-11,186,187 in patients with 
conditions in all stages of recovery.
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
More research is needed to determine whether any long-term 
differences in pain or PROMs occur in patients with PFP who 
receive either hip- or knee-targeted exercise therapy. More 
research is needed to gain greater understanding of outcome 
differences between patients who receive a combination of 
hip- and knee-targeted exercise therapy versus those who 
receive knee-targeted exercise therapy alone. In addition, a 
standardized approach is needed for future research when 
delineating either knee- or hip-targeted exercise.
Despite compelling evidence for the use of exercise therapy in 
the treatment of people with PFP, exercise programs reported 
to be effective are unable to be replicated.143 Therefore, clini -
cians treating PFP are encouraged to use accepted exercise 
prescription principles, as recommended by the American 
College of Sports Medicine,7,322 to guide exercise prescrip -
tion targeting the hip and knee, based on individual deficits 
identified in each patient. Specifically, the treating clinician 
should assess, consider, and address appropriate neuromo -
tor control, along with muscular endurance, strength, and 
power. Further guidance related to this is provided at https://
ipfrn.org/exercise-guide/ .
There is a long-held belief among experts that tailoring and 
targeting treatment to individual patients may improve the 
effectiveness of physical therapy.18,80,310 However, to date, 
there is little evidence for a validated approach to achieve 
this. Nonetheless, the physical therapist is encouraged to use 
clinical reasoning to target interventions toward individuals 
when possible,18 and to use a shared decision-making process 
during plan-of-care development.17pain with ROM.190 Because irritability level and the duration 
of symptoms do not always match, clinicians may be required 
to make judgments when applying time-based research re -
sults to individual patients.28 Diagnosis of tissue irritability 
is important for guiding clinical decisions regarding treat -
ment frequency, intensity, duration, and type, with the goal 
of matching the optimal dosage of treatment to the status 
of the tissue being treated.28,157 Using an approach similar to 
that proposed by McClure and Michener,190 clinicians should 
use tissue irritability as a factor to consider when determin -
ing intervention type and intensity. Patients with PFP with 
high irritability (fairly constant pain greater than 5/10 that 
fluctuates related to activity) may benefit from interventions 
to reduce physical stress to the knee structures (eg, patel -
lar taping). Those patients with low irritability (intermit -
tent low-level pain less than 3/10 not easily aggravated) may 
benefit from interventions that apply more physical stress to 
the tissues of the knee, such as weight-bearing strengthen -
ing exercises, and thus provide appropriate stress to result in 
adaptation of structures to increased load.200
Component 4
Outcome measures are standardized tools used for measur -
ing a specific domain, whether it is a body structure or func -
tion, activity limitation, or participation restriction, or for 
determining a specific end point. They are important in di -
rect management of individual patient care, and they provide 
the opportunity to collectively compare care and determine 
effectiveness through the repeated application of a standard -
ized measurement. Outcomes in clinical practice provide the 
mechanism by which the health care provider, the patient, 
the public, and the payer are able to assess the end results 
of care and its effect on the health of the patient and society. 
Outcome measurements can identify baseline pain, function, 
and disability, assess global knee function, determine readi -
ness to return to activities, and monitor changes in status 
throughout treatment. Outcome measures can be classified 
as PROMs, physical performance measures, and physical 
impairment measures. Information for outcome measures is 
detailed in this CPG’s Examination section.
Component 5
Clinical signs and symptoms have typically guided the clinical 
decision making of treatment interventions. These clinical 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg45
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAppropriate for physical therapy 
evaluation and interventionAppropriate for physical therapy 
evaluation and intervention, along 
with consultation with another 
health care providerNot appropriate for physical therapy 
evaluation and interventionComponent 1: medical screening (includes psychological screening)
Component 2: classify condition through diﬀerential evaluation of clinical ﬁndings suggestive of musculoskeletal 
impairments of body functioning (ICF) and the associated tissue pathology/ disease (ICD)
Classiﬁcation (F)Diagnosis of PFP (B)
• Retropatellar or peripatellar pain
• Reproduction of retropatellar or peripatellar pain with 
squatting, stair climbing, prolonged sitting, or other 
functional activities loading the PF J in a ﬂexed position
• Positive patellar tilt test
• Exclusion of all other possible sources of anterior knee pain
Physical Impairment Measures
• Patellofemoral pain cluster of ﬁndings
Overuse/Overload 
Without Other 
Impairment (C)
• Eccentric step-down 
test
• Reproduction of 
anterior knee painDiﬀerential Diagnosis
• Consider other knee conditions and symptoms referred from 
hip or lumbopelvic region
• Consider systemic or medical conditions that may impact 
diagnosis and management
• Consider psychological issues that may require referral to a 
health care practitioner in addition to physical therapyVersus Versus
Consultation with appropriate health 
care provider
Patient Examination 
No
PFP With Movement 
Coordination Deﬁcits (C)
• Dynamic valgus on 
lateral step-down test
- >2-point score on 
quality of movement
• Frontal plane valgus 
during single-leg squat
- >10° increase in 
FPPA (change in 
FPPA from the start 
position to the point 
of peak knee ﬂexion)PFP With Muscle 
Performance Deﬁcits (C)
• HipSIT
• Hip muscle strength 
testing (isometric)
- Abductors (male, 
<37% BM; female, 
<30% BM)
- External rotators 
(male, <13% BM; 
female, <17% BM)
- Extensors (male, 
<28% BM; female, 
<30% BM)
• Thigh strength testing 
(isometric)
- Knee extensors 
(male, <44% BM; 
female, <37% BM)
- Knee ﬂexorsPFP With Mobility Impairments (C)
Hypermobility
• Foot mobility testing
- Midfoot width in NWB and WB
- >11-mm diﬀerence between NWB and WB
- Foot Posture Index score >6
Hypomobility
• Patellar tilt test of lateral patellar retinaculum
• Muscle length testing
- Hamstrings
• Straight leg raise <79.1° (goniometry)
- Gastrocnemius
• Ankle dorsiﬂexion (knee extended) <7 .4° 
(goniometry)
- Soleus
• Ankle dorsiﬂexion (knee ﬂexed to 90°) 
<14.8° (goniometry)
- Quadriceps
• Prone knee ﬂexion <134.0° (inclinometry)
- Iliotibial band
• Ober test (knee ﬂexed to 90°) <11° 
(inclinometry)
• Hip IR and ER ROM testing
FIGURE.  Decision tree model. *Letters in parentheses reflect the grade of evidence on which the recommendation for each item is based: (A) strong evidence, (B) moderate 
evidence, (C) weak evidence, (D) conflicting evidence, (E) theoretical/foundational evidence, and (F) expert opinion. Abbreviations: AKPS, Anterior Knee Pain Scale; BM, body 
mass; ER, external rotation; FPPA, frontal plane projetion angle; HipSIT , Hip Stability Isometric T est; IR, internal rotation; KOOS-PF , Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome 
Score-patellofemoral pain and osteoarthritis subscale; NPRS, numeric pain-rating scale; NWB, non–weight bearing; PF J, patellofemoral joint; PFP , patellofemoral pain; ROM, 
range of motion; WB, weight bearing.Figure continues on page CPG46 .
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg46   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesRe-evaluate
Patient goals met
Discharge to self-management
Successful recovery
• T olerable intermittent pain
• Resumed primary activities
• Patient goals metNot improving/worsening occurs
Refer
• Consultation with other providers 
Adjust/ modify interventions
• Patient goals metComponent 3: determination of irritability stage
Diagnosis of tissue irritability is important for guiding the clinical decisions regarding intervention frequency, intensity, duration, and 
type, with the goal of matching the optimal dosage of intervention to the status of the tissue being treated. There are cases where 
the alignment of irritability and duration of symptoms does not match, requiring clinicians to make judgments when applying 
time-based research results on a patient-by-patient basis. Stage of irritability should classify the patient's condition as being 
acute or nonacute, using the diagnostic indicators outlined in component 5.
Measures to Assess Level of Functioning, Presence of Associated Physical Impairments to Address With 
Interventions, and Response to Intervention
Activity Limitations and Pain: Patient-Reported Measures 
• AKPS or KOOS-PF (A)
• Visual analog scale: usual and worst pain, or NPRS for pain intensity (A)
Activity Limitations: Physical Performance Measures
• Anterior knee pain with squatting (B)Component 4: outcome measures
Component 5: intervention strategies
Overuse/Overload 
Without Other 
Impairment
• T aping (B)
• Activity modiﬁca-
tion/ relative rest (F)PFP With Movement 
Coordination Deﬁcits 
• Gait and movement 
retraining (C)PFP With Muscle 
Performance Deﬁcits 
• Hip/ gluteal muscle 
strengthening (A)
• Quadriceps muscle 
strengthening (A)PFP With Mobility Impairments
Hypermobility
• Foot orthosis (A)
• T aping (B)
Hypomobility
• Patellar retinaculum/ soft tissue mobilization (F)
• Muscle stretching (F)
- Hamstrings
- Quadriceps
- Gastrocnemius
- Soleus
- Iliotibial band
FIGURE (CONTINUED).  Decision tree model. *Letters in parentheses reflect the grade of evidence on which the recommendation for each item is based: (A) strong evidence, 
(B) moderate evidence, (C) weak evidence, (D) conflicting evidence, (E) theoretical/foundational evidence, and (F) expert opinion. Abbreviations: AKPS, Anterior Knee 
Pain Scale; BM, body mass; ER, external rotation; FPPA, frontal plane projetion angle; HipSIT , Hip Stability Isometric T est; IR, internal rotation; KOOS-PF , Knee injury and 
Osteoarthritis Outcome Score-patellofemoral pain and osteoarthritis subscale; NPRS, numeric pain-rating scale; NWB, non–weight bearing; PF J, patellofemoral joint; PFP , 
patellofemoral pain; ROM, range of motion; WB, weight bearing.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg47
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAUTHORS
Richard W. Willy, PT , PhD
Assistant Professor
Department of Physical Therapy
University of Montana
Missoula, MT
richard.willy@mso.umt.edu
Lisa T . Hoglund, PT , PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Physical Therapy
Thomas Jefferson University
Philadelphia, PA
lisa.hoglund@jefferson.edu
Christian J. Barton, PT , PhD
La T robe Sport and Exercise Medicine 
Research Centre
Melbourne, Australia
and
Department of Surgery
St Vincent’s Hospital
University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
c.barton@latrobe.edu.au
Lori A. Bolgla, PT , PhD
Professor and Kellett Chair in Allied 
Health Sciences
Department of Physical Therapy
Augusta University
Augusta, GA
lbolgla@augusta.edu
David A. Scalzitti, PT , PhD
Assistant Professor
Department of Physical Therapy
George Washington University
Washington, DC
scalzitt@gwu.edu
David S. Logerstedt, PT , PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Physical Therapy
University of the Sciences
Philadelphia, PA
and
ICF-Based Knee Clinical Practice 
Guidelines Work Group Leader
Academy of Orthopaedic Physical 
Therapy, APT A, Inc
La Crosse, WI
d.logerstedt@usciences.eduAndrew D. Lynch, PT , PhD
Assistant Professor
Department of Physical Therapy
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA
adl45@pitt.edu
Lynn Snyder-Mackler, PT , ScD, FAPT A
Alumni Distinguished Professor and 
Faculty Athletics Representative
Department of Physical Therapy
University of Delaware
Newark, DE
smack@udel.edu
Christine M. McDonough, PT , PhD
Editor
ICF-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines
Academy of Orthopaedic Physical 
Therapy, APT A, Inc
La Crosse, WI
and
Assistant Professor of Physical Therapy
School of Health and Rehabilitation 
Sciences
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA
cmm295@pitt.edu
REVIEWERS
Roy Altman, MD
Professor of Medicine
Division of Rheumatology and 
Immunology
David Geffen School of Medicine
University of California at Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA
journals@royaltman.com
Paul Beattie, PT , PhD
Clinical Professor
Doctoral Program in Physical Therapy
Department of Exercise Science
Arnold School of Public Health
University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC
pbeattie@mailbox.sc.edu
Amanda Ferland, DPT
Clinical Faculty
T ongji University/USC Division of 
Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy
Orthopaedic Physical Therapy Residency 
and Spine Rehabilitation FellowshipShanghai, China
AmandaFerland@incarehab.com
Lee Herrington, PhD, MCSP
Senior Physiotherapist 
(multisport)-Northwest
T echnical Lead Physiotherapist (lower-
limb rehabilitation)
English Institute of Sport
Manchester Institute of Health and 
Performance
Manchester, United Kingdom
Lee.Herrington@eis2win.co.uk
Sandra Kaplan, PT , PhD
Clinical Practice Guidelines Coordinator
Academy of Pediatric Physical Therapy, 
APT A, Inc
and
Professor
Doctoral Programs in Physical  
Therapy
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ
kaplansa@shp.rutgers.edu
David Killoran, PhD
Patient/Consumer Representative
ICF-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines
Academy of Orthopaedic Physical 
Therapy, APT A, Inc
La Crosse, WI
and
Professor Emeritus
Loyola Marymount University
Los Angeles, CA
david.killoran@lmu.edu
T om McPoil, PT , PhD
Professor Emeritus
Regis University
Denver, CO
tmcpoil@regis.edu
Christopher Powers, PT , PhD, FAPT A
Professor and Director
Program in Biokinesiology
and
Co-Director
Musculoskeletal Biomechanics 
Research Lab
Division of Biokinesiology and Physical 
Therapy
University of Southern CaliforniaLos Angeles, CA
powers@pt.usc.edu
Leslie T orburn, DPT
Principal and Consultant
Silhouette Consulting, Inc
Sacramento, CA
torburn@yahoo.com
GUIDELINES EDITORS
Christine M. McDonough, PT , PhD
Editor
ICF-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines
Academy of Orthopaedic Physical 
Therapy, APT A, Inc
La Crosse, WI
and
Assistant Professor of Physical Therapy
School of Health and Rehabilitation 
Sciences
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA
cmm295@pitt.edu
Guy G. Simoneau, PT , PhD, ATC, FAPT A
Editor
ICF-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines
Academy of Orthopaedic Physical 
Therapy, APT A, Inc
La Crosse, WI
and
Professor
Physical Therapy Department
Marquette University
Milwaukee, WI
guy.simoneau@marquette.edu
Robroy L. Martin, PT , PhD
Editor
ICF-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines
Academy of Orthopaedic Physical 
Therapy, APT A, Inc
La Crosse, WI
and
Professor
Department of Physical Therapy
Duquesne University
Pittsburgh, PA
and
Staff Physical Therapist
UPMC Center for Sports Medicine
Pittsburgh, PA
martinr280@duq.eduAFFILIATIONS AND CONTACTS
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg48   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines 1.   Adu J, Nixon M, Bass A. A child with knee pain. BMJ. 2012;344:e250. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e250
 2.   Agre JC, Magness JL, Hull SZ, et al. Strength testing with a portable 
dynamometer: reliability for upper and lower extremities. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil . 1987;68:454-458.
 3.   Ahmed Hamada H, Hussein Draz A, Koura GM, Saab IM. Carryover effect 
of hip and knee exercises program on functional performance in individu -
als with patellofemoral pain syndrome. J Phys Ther Sci . 2017;29:1341-1347 . 
https:// doi.org/10.1589/jpts.29.1341
 4.   Almeida GPL, das Neves Rodrigues HL, de Freitas BW, de Paula Lima PO. 
Reliability and validity of the Hip Stability Isometric T est (HipSIT): a new 
method to assess hip posterolateral muscle strength. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther . 2017;47:906-913. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2017 .7274
 5.   Almeida GPL, Silva AP , França F J, Magalhães MO, Burke TN, Marques 
AP . Relationship between frontal plane projection angle of the knee and 
hip and trunk strength in women with and without patellofemoral pain. J 
Back Musculoskelet Rehabil . 2016;29:259-266. https:// doi.org/10.3233/
BMR-150622
 6.   Alshehri A, Lohman E, Daher NS, et al. Cross-cultural adaptation and psy -
chometric properties testing of the Arabic Anterior Knee Pain Scale. Med 
Sci Monit . 2017;23:1559-1582. https:// doi.org/10.12659/ msm.901264
 7.   American College of Sports Medicine. Position stand. Progression 
models in resistance training for healthy adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 
2009;41:687-708. https:// doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181915670
 8.   Apivatgaroon A, Angthong C, Sanguanjit P , Chernchujit B. The validity and 
reliability of the Thai version of the Kujala score for patients with patel -
lofemoral pain syndrome. Disabil Rehabil . 2016;38:2161-2164. https:// doi.
org/10.3109/09638288.2015.1114035
 9.   Ardern CL, Österberg A, T agesson S, Gauffin H, Webster KE, Kvist J. The 
impact of psychological readiness to return to sport and recreational 
activities after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Br J Sports Med . 
2014;48:1613-1619. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093842
 10.   Ardern CL, T aylor NF , Feller JA, Webster KE. Fear of re-injury in people who 
have returned to sport following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction 
surgery. J Sci Med Sport . 2012;15:488-495. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
jsams.2012.03.015
 11.   Ardern CL, T aylor NF , Feller JA, Whitehead TS, Webster KE. Psychological 
responses matter in returning to preinjury level of sport after anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction surgery. Am J Sports Med . 2013;41:1549-
1558. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546513489284
 12.   Aysin IK, Askin A, Mete BD, Guvendi E, Aysin M, Kocyigit H. Investigation of 
the relationship between anterior knee pain and chondromalacia patellae 
and patellofemoral malalignment. Eurasian J Med . 2018;50:28-33. https://
doi.org/10.5152/ eurasianjmed.2018.17277
 13.   Baker RL, Fredericson M. Iliotibial band syndrome in runners: biomechani -
cal implications and exercise interventions. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am . 
2016;27:53-77 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.pmr.2015.08.001
 14.   Bakhtiary AH, Fatemi E. Open versus closed kinetic chain exercises for pa -
tellar chondromalacia. Br J Sports Med . 2008;42:99-102; discussion 102. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2007 .038109
 15.   Barton C, Balachandar V , Lack S, Morrissey D. Patellar taping for patel -
lofemoral pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate clinical 
outcomes and biomechanical mechanisms. Br J Sports Med . 2014;48:417-
424. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2013-092437
 16.   Barton CJ, Bonanno D, Levinger P , Menz HB. Foot and ankle characteris -
tics in patellofemoral pain syndrome: a case control and reliability study. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2010;40:286-296. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2010.3227
 17.   Barton CJ, Crossley KM. Sharing decision-making between patient and 
clinician: the next step in evidence-based practice for patellofemoral pain? Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:833-834. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2015-095607
 18.   Barton CJ, Lack S, Hemmings S, T ufail S, Morrissey D. The ‘Best Practice 
Guide to Conservative Management of Patellofemoral Pain’: incorporat -
ing level 1 evidence with expert clinical reasoning. Br J Sports Med . 
2015;49:923-934. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093637
 19.   Barton CJ, Lack S, Malliaras P , Morrissey D. Gluteal muscle activity and 
patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med . 
2013;47:207-214. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2012-090953
 20.   Barton CJ, Levinger P , Menz HB, Webster KE. Kinematic gait charac -
teristics associated with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic 
review. Gait Posture . 2009;30:405-416. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
gaitpost.2009.07 .109
 21.   Barton CJ, Menz HB, Crossley KM. Clinical predictors of foot orthoses 
efficacy in individuals with patellofemoral pain. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 
2011;43:1603-1610. https:// doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e318211c45d
 22.   Barton CJ, Menz HB, Levinger P , Webster KE, Crossley KM. Greater peak 
rearfoot eversion predicts foot orthoses efficacy in individuals with patel -
lofemoral pain syndrome. Br J Sports Med . 2011;45:697-701. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsm.2010.077644
 23.   Barton CJ, Munteanu SE, Menz HB, Crossley KM. The efficacy of foot 
orthoses in the treatment of individuals with patellofemoral pain syn -
drome: a systematic review. Sports Med . 2010;40:377-395. https:// doi.
org/10.2165/11530780-000000000-00000
 24.   Bartynski WS, Petropoulou KA. The MR imaging features and clinical cor -
relates in low back pain–related syndromes. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N 
Am. 2007;15:137-154. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.mric.2007 .01.010
 25.   Bergbom S, Boersma K, Overmeer T , Linton SJ. Relationship among 
pain catastrophizing, depressed mood, and outcomes across physical 
therapy treatments. Phys Ther . 2011;91:754-764. https:// doi.org/10.2522/
ptj.20100136
 26.   Beutler AI, Cooper LW, Kirkendall DT , Garrett WE, Jr. Electromyographic 
analysis of single-leg, closed chain exercises: implications for reha -
bilitation after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. J Athl T rain . 
2002;37:13-18.
 27.   Bily W, T rimmel L, Mödlin M, Kaider A, Kern H. T raining program and ad -
ditional electric muscle stimulation for patellofemoral pain syndrome: 
a pilot study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 2008;89:1230-1236. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.apmr.2007 .10.048
 28.   Blanpied PR, Gross AR, Elliott JM, et al. Neck pain: revision 2017 . J 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2017;47:A1-A83. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2017 .0302
 29.   Blond L, Hansen L. Patellofemoral pain syndrome in athletes: a 5.7-
year retrospective follow-up study of 250 athletes. Acta Orthop Belg . 
1998;64:393-400.
 30.   Bohannon RW. Reference values for extremity muscle strength ob -
tained by hand-held dynamometry from adults aged 20 to 79 years. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 1997;78:26-32. https:// doi.org/10.1016/
S0003-9993(97)90005-8
 31.   Bolgla LA, Earl-Boehm J, Emery C, Hamstra-Wright K, Ferber R. Pain, func -
tion, and strength outcomes for males and females with patellofemoral 
pain who participate in either a hip/ core- or knee-based rehabilitation 
program. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2016;11:926-935.
 32.   Boling M, Padua D, Marshall S, Guskiewicz K, Pyne S, Beutler A. Gen -
der differences in the incidence and prevalence of patellofemoral pain 
syndrome. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 2010;20:725-730. https:// doi.
org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.2009.00996.x
 33.   Boling MC, Padua DA, Creighton RA. Concentric and eccentric torque of 
the hip musculature in individuals with and without patellofemoral pain. J 
Athl T rain . 2009;44:7-13. https:// doi.org/10.4085/1062-6050-44.1.7
 34.   Boling MC, Padua DA, Marshall SW, Guskiewicz K, Pyne S, Beutler A. A REFERENCES
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg49
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesprospective investigation of biomechanical risk factors for patellofemoral 
pain syndrome: the Joint Undertaking to Monitor and Prevent ACL Injury 
(JUMP-ACL) cohort. Am J Sports Med . 2009;37:2108-2116. https:// doi.
org/10.1177 /0363546509337934
 35.   Bonacci J, Hall M, Saunders N, Vicenzino B. Gait retraining versus foot or -
thoses for patellofemoral pain: a pilot randomised clinical trial. J Sci Med 
Sport . 2018;21:457-461. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2017 .09.187
 36.   Bradbury M, Brosky JA, Jr., Walker JF , West K. Relationship between 
scores from the Knee Outcome Survey and a single assessment numeri -
cal rating in patients with patellofemoral pain. Physiother Theory Pract . 
2013;29:531-535. https:// doi.org/10.3109/09593985.2012.762077
 37.   Briani RV , Pazzinatto MF , De Oliveira Silva D, Azevedo FM. Different pain 
responses to distinct levels of physical activity in women with patello -
femoral pain. Braz J Phys Ther . 2017;21:138-143. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
bjpt.2017 .03.009
 38.   Brushøj C, Larsen K, Albrecht-Beste E, Nielsen MB, Løye F , Hölmich P . 
Prevention of overuse injuries by a concurrent exercise program in sub -
jects exposed to an increase in training load: a randomized controlled trial 
of 1020 army recruits. Am J Sports Med . 2008;36:663-670. https:// doi.
org/10.1177 /0363546508315469
 39.   Buckinx F , Bornheim S, Remy G, et al. French translation and validation 
of the “ Anterior Knee Pain Scale” (AKPS). Disabil Rehabil . 2019;41:1089-
1094. https:// doi.org/10.1080/09638288.2017 .1419288
 40.   Buckland AJ, Miyamoto R, Patel RD, Slover J, Razi AE. Differentiating hip 
pathology from lumbar spine pathology: key points of evaluation and 
management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg . 2017;25:e23-e34. https:// doi.
org/10.5435/ JAAOS-D-15-00740
 41.   Callaghan MJ, Selfe J. Has the incidence or prevalence of patellofemoral 
pain in the general population in the United Kingdom been properly 
evaluated? Phys Ther Sport . 2007;8:37-43. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
ptsp.2006.07 .001
 42.   Callaghan MJ, Selfe J. Patellar taping for patellofemoral pain syndrome 
in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2012:CD006717 . https:// doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD006717 .pub2
 43.   Calmbach WL, Hutchens M. Evaluation of patients presenting with knee 
pain: part II. Differential diagnosis. Am Fam Physician . 2003;68:917-922.
 44.   Carlson VR, Boden BP , Shen A, Jackson JN, Y ao L, Sheehan FT . 
The tibial tubercle–trochlear groove distance is greater in patients 
with patellofemoral pain: implications for the origin of pain and 
clinical interventions. Am J Sports Med . 2017;45:1110-1116. https:// doi.
org/10.1177 /0363546516681002
 45.   Carow SD, Houser JD. T rainees with displaced hip fractures present 
to physical therapy with primary complaint of knee pain. Mil Med . 
2017;182:e2095-e2098. https:// doi.org/10.7205/MILMED-D-17-00156
 46.   Celik D, Co şkunsu D, Kılıço ğlu Ö. T ranslation and cultural adaptation 
of the T urkish Lysholm knee scale: ease of use, validity, and reliability. 
Clin Orthop Relat Res . 2013;471:2602-2610. https:// doi.org/10.1007 /
s11999-013-3046-z
 47.   Chesworth BM, Culham E, T ata GE, Peat M. Validation of outcome mea -
sures in patients with patellofemoral syndrome. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 1989;10:302-308. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.1989.10.8.302
 48.   Cheung RT , Ngai SP , Lam PL, Chiu JK, Fung EY . Chinese adaptation 
and validation of the Patellofemoral Pain Severity Scale. Clin Rehabil . 
2013;27:468-472. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0269215512456309
 49.   Cheung RT , Ngai SP , Lam PL, Chiu JK, Fung EY . Chinese translation and 
validation of the Kujala scale for patients with patellofemoral pain. Disabil 
Rehabil . 2012;34:510-513. https:// doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2011.61049
4
 50.   Chmielewski TL, Stackhouse S, Axe MJ, Snyder-Mackler L. A prospective 
analysis of incidence and severity of quadriceps inhibition in a consecu -
tive sample of 100 patients with complete acute anterior cruciate liga -
ment rupture. J Orthop Res . 2004;22:925-930. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.orthres.2004.01.007
 51.   Cibulka MT , Bloom NJ, Enseki KR, MacDonald CW, Woehrle J, McDonough 
CM. Hip pain and mobility deficits—hip osteoarthritis: revision 2017 . 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2017;47:A1-A37 . https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2017 .0301
 52.   Cibulka MT , White DM, Woehrle J, et al. Hip pain and mobility deficits – hip 
osteoarthritis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2009;39:A1-A25. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2009.0301
 53.   Clark DI, Downing N, Mitchell J, Coulson L, Syzpryt EP , Doherty M. Physio -
therapy for anterior knee pain: a randomised controlled trial. Ann Rheum 
Dis. 2000;59:700-704. https:// doi.org/10.1136/ ard.59.9.700
 54.   Clijsen R, Fuchs J, T aeymans J. Effectiveness of exercise therapy in 
treatment of patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Phys Ther . 2014;94:1697-1708. https:// doi.
org/10.2522/ ptj.20130310
 55.   Collado H, Fredericson M. Patellofemoral pain syndrome. Clin Sports Med . 
2010;29:379-398. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.csm.2010.03.012
 56.   Collins N, Crossley K, Beller E, Darnell R, McPoil T , Vicenzino B. Foot ortho -
ses and physiotherapy in the treatment of patellofemoral pain syndrome: 
randomised clinical trial. BMJ. 2008;337:a1735. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.a1735
 57.   Collins N, Crossley K, Beller E, Darnell R, McPoil T , Vicenzino B. Foot ortho -
ses and physiotherapy in the treatment of patellofemoral pain syndrome: 
randomised clinical trial. Br J Sports Med . 2009;43:169-171.
 58.   Collins NJ, Barton CJ, van Middelkoop M, et al. 2018 consensus state -
ment on exercise therapy and physical interventions (orthoses, taping and 
manual therapy) to treat patellofemoral pain: recommendations from the 
5th International Patellofemoral Pain Research Retreat, Gold Coast, Aus -
tralia, 2017 . Br J Sports Med . 2018;52:1170-1178. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2018-099397
 59.   Collins NJ, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, Crossley KM, van Linschoten RL, Vicen -
zino B, van Middelkoop M. Prognostic factors for patellofemoral pain: a 
multicentre observational analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2013;47:227-233. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2012-091696
 60.   Collins NJ, Bisset LM, Crossley KM, Vicenzino B. Efficacy of nonsurgi -
cal interventions for anterior knee pain: systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized trials. Sports Med . 2012;42:31-49. https:// doi.
org/10.2165/11594460-000000000-00000
 61.   Collins NJ, Vicenzino B, van der Heijden RA, van Middelkoop M. Pain 
during prolonged sitting is a common problem in persons with patel -
lofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2016;46:658-663. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6470
 62.   Conchie H, Clark D, Metcalfe A, Eldridge J, Whitehouse M. Adolescent 
knee pain and patellar dislocations are associated with patellofemoral 
osteoarthritis in adulthood: a case control study. Knee . 2016;23:708-711. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2016.04.009
 63.   Cook C, Hegedus E, Hawkins R, Scovell F , Wyland D. Diagnostic accuracy 
and association to disability of clinical test findings associated with patel -
lofemoral pain syndrome. Physiother Can . 2010;62:17-24. https:// doi.
org/10.3138/ physio.62.1.17
 64.   Cook C, Mabry L, Reiman MP , Hegedus EJ. Best tests/ clinical findings 
for screening and diagnosis of patellofemoral pain syndrome: a system -
atic review. Physiotherapy . 2012;98:93-100. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
physio.2011.09.001
 65.   Cook CE. Orthopedic Manual Therapy: An Evidence-Based Approach . 2nd 
ed. Boston, MA: Pearson; 2011.
 66.   Cornwall MW, McPoil TG, Lebec M, Vicenzino B, Wilson J. Reliability of 
the modified Foot Posture Index. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc . 2008;98:7-13. 
https:// doi.org/10.7547 /0980007
 67.   Cowan SM, Bennell KL, Hodges PW. Therapeutic patellar taping changes 
the timing of vasti muscle activation in people with patellofemoral pain 
syndrome. Clin J Sport Med . 2002;12:339-347 .
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg50   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines 68.   Crossley K, Bennell K, Green S, Cowan S, McConnell J. Physical therapy 
for patellofemoral pain: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled 
trial. Am J Sports Med . 2002;30:857-865. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /036354
65020300061701
 69.   Crossley KM. Is patellofemoral osteoarthritis a common sequela of 
patellofemoral pain? Br J Sports Med . 2014;48:409-410. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093445
 70.   Crossley KM, Bennell KL, Cowan SM, Green S. Analysis of outcome 
measures for persons with patellofemoral pain: which are reliable and 
valid? Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 2004;85:815-822. https:// doi.org/10.1016/
S0003-9993(03)00613-0
 71.   Crossley KM, Callaghan MJ, van Linschoten R. Patellofemoral 
pain. Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:247-250. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2015-h3939rep
 72.   Crossley KM, Cowan SM, Bennell KL, McConnell J. Knee flexion during 
stair ambulation is altered in individuals with patellofemoral pain. J Or-
thop Res . 2004;22:267-274. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.orthres.2003.08.014
 73.   Crossley KM, Macri EM, Cowan SM, Collins NJ, Roos EM. The patel -
lofemoral pain and osteoarthritis subscale of the KOOS (KOOS-PF): 
development and validation using the COSMIN checklist. Br J Sports Med . 
2018;52:1130-1136. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096776
 74.   Crossley KM, Stefanik JJ, Selfe J, et al. 2016 patellofemoral pain consen -
sus statement from the 4th International Patellofemoral Pain Research 
Retreat, Manchester. Part 1: terminology, definitions, clinical examina -
tion, natural history, patellofemoral osteoarthritis and patient-reported 
outcome measures. Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:839-843. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096384
 75.   Crossley KM, van Middelkoop M, Callaghan MJ, Collins NJ, Rathleff MS, 
Barton CJ. 2016 patellofemoral pain consensus statement from the 4th 
International Patellofemoral Pain Research Retreat, Manchester. Part 2: 
recommended physical interventions (exercise, taping, bracing, foot or -
thoses and combined interventions). Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:844-852. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096268
 76.   Culvenor AG, Collins NJ, Vicenzino B, et al. Predictors and effects of patel -
lofemoral pain following hamstring-tendon ACL reconstruction. J Sci Med 
Sport . 2016;19:518-523. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2015.07 .008
 77.   Culvenor AG, Øiestad BE, Holm I, Gunderson RB, Crossley KM, Risberg 
MA. Anterior knee pain following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruc -
tion does not increase the risk of patellofemoral osteoarthritis at 15- and 
20-year follow-ups. Osteoarthritis Cartilage . 2017;25:30-33. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.joca.2016.09.012
 78.   da Cunha RA, Costa LO, Hespanhol Junior LC, Pires RS, Kujala UM, Lopes 
AD. T ranslation, cross-cultural adaptation, and clinimetric testing of 
instruments used to assess patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome 
in the Brazilian population. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2013;43:332-339. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.4228
 79.   Davis DS, Quinn RO, Whiteman CT , Williams JD, Y oung CR. Concur -
rent validity of four clinical tests used to measure hamstring flexibil -
ity. J Strength Cond Res.  2008;22:583-588. https:// doi.org/10.1519/
JSC.0b013e31816359f2
 80.   Davis IS, Powers CM. Patellofemoral pain syndrome: proximal, distal, 
and local factors—an international retreat. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2010;40:A1-A48. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2010.0302
 81.   Décary S, Frémont P , Pelletier B, et al. Validity of combining history ele -
ments and physical examination tests to diagnose patellofemoral pain. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 2018;99:607-614.e1. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
apmr.2017 .10.014
82.   Décary S, Ouellet P , Vendittoli PA, Desmeules F . Reliability of physical 
examination tests for the diagnosis of knee disorders: evidence from a 
systematic review. Man Ther.  2016;26:172-182. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2016.09.007
 83.   Delitto A, George SZ, Van Dillen L, et al. Low back pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2012;42:A1-A57 . https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2012.42.4.A1
84.   de Marche Baldon R, Serrão FV , Scattone Silva R, Piva SR. Effects of 
functional stabilization training on pain, function, and lower extremity 
biomechanics in women with patellofemoral pain: a randomized clinical 
trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2014;44:240-251. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2014.4940
 85.   Demirci S, Kinikli GI, Callaghan MJ, T unay VB. Comparison of short-term 
effects of mobilization with movement and Kinesiotaping on pain, func -
tion and balance in patellofemoral pain. Acta Orthop T raumatol T urc . 
2017;51:442-447 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.aott.2017 .09.005
86.   de Moura Campos Carvalho-e-Silva AP , Almeida GPL, Magalhães MO, et 
al. Dynamic postural stability and muscle strength in patellofemoral pain: 
is there a correlation? Knee . 2016;23:616-621. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
knee.2016.04.013
 87.   de Oliveira Silva D, Briani RV , Pazzinatto MF , Ferrari D, Aragão FA, de Aze -
vedo FM. Reduced knee flexion is a possible cause of increased loading 
rates in individuals with patellofemoral pain. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 
2015;30:971-975. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2015.06.021
 88.   De Oliveira Silva D, Rathleff MS, Petersen K, Azevedo FM, Barton CJ. Mani -
festations of pain sensitization across different painful knee disorders: a 
systematic review including meta-analysis and metaregression. Pain Med . 
2019;20:335-358. https:// doi.org/10.1093/ pm/ pny177
 89.   Dierks T A, Manal KT , Hamill J, Davis I. Lower extremity kinematics in run -
ners with patellofemoral pain during a prolonged run. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc . 2011;43:693-700. https:// doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181f744f5
 90.   Dolak KL, Silkman C, Medina McKeon J, Hosey RG, Lattermann C, Uhl TL. 
Hip strengthening prior to functional exercises reduces pain sooner than 
quadriceps strengthening in females with patellofemoral pain syndrome: 
a randomized clinical trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2011;41:560-570. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2011.3499
 91.   dos Anjos Rabelo ND, Costa LOP , de Lima BM, et al. Adding motor control 
training to muscle strengthening did not substantially improve the effects 
on clinical or kinematic outcomes in women with patellofemoral pain: a 
randomised controlled trial. Gait Posture . 2017;58:280-286. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2017 .08.018
 92.   Dowling GJ, Murley GS, Munteanu SE, et al. Dynamic foot function as a 
risk factor for lower limb overuse injury: a systematic review. J Foot Ankle 
Res. 2014;7:53. https:// doi.org/10.1186/ s13047-014-0053-6
93.   Draper CE, Fredericson M, Gold GE, et al. Patients with patellofemoral pain 
exhibit elevated bone metabolic activity at the patellofemoral joint. J Or-
thop Res . 2012;30:209-213. https:// doi.org/10.1002/jor.21523
 94.   Drew BT , Redmond AC, Smith TO, Penny F , Conaghan PG. Which patel -
lofemoral joint imaging features are associated with patellofemoral 
pain? Systematic review and meta-analysis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage . 
2016;24:224-236. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2015.09.004
 95.   Dursun N, Dursun E, Kiliç Z. Electromyographic biofeedback–controlled 
exercise versus conservative care for patellofemoral pain syndrome. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 2001;82:1692-1695. https:// doi.org/10.1053/
apmr.2001.26253
 96.   Dye SF . The pathophysiology of patellofemoral pain: a tissue homeosta -
sis perspective. Clin Orthop Relat Res . 2005;436:100-110. https:// doi.
org/10.1097 /01.blo.0000172303.74414.7d
 97.   Emparanza JI, Aginaga JR. Validation of the Ottawa Knee Rules. Ann 
Emerg Med . 2001;38:364-368. https:// doi.org/10.1067 / mem.2001.118011
 98.   Escamilla RF , Fleisig GS, Zheng N, Barrentine SW, Wilk KE, Andrews JR. 
Biomechanics of the knee during closed kinetic chain and open kinetic 
chain exercises. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 1998;30:556-569.
 99.   Escamilla RF , Francisco AC, Kayes AV , Speer KP , Moorman CT , 3rd. An elec -
tromyographic analysis of sumo and conventional style deadlifts. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc . 2002;34:682-688.
 100.   Esculier JF , Bouyer LJ, Dubois B, Frémont P , Moore L, Roy JS. Effects of 
rehabilitation approaches for runners with patellofemoral pain: protocol 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg51
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesof a randomised clinical trial addressing specific underlying mecha -
nisms. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . 2016;17:5. https:// doi.org/10.1186/
s12891-015-0859-9
 101.   Esculier JF , Roy JS, Bouyer LJ. Psychometric evidence of self-reported 
questionnaires for patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. 
Disabil Rehabil . 2013;35:2181-2190. https:// doi.org/10.3109/09638288.20
13.774061
 102.   Espí-López GV , Serra-Añó P , Vicent-Ferrando J, et al. Effectiveness of inclu -
sion of dry needling in a multimodal therapy program for patellofemoral 
pain: a randomized parallel-group trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2017;47:392-401. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2017 .7389
 103.   Evcik D, Ay S, Ege A, T urel A, Kavuncu V . Adaptation and validation of T urk -
ish version of the Knee Outcome Survey-Activities for Daily Living Scale. 
Clin Orthop Relat Res . 2009;467:2077-2082. https:// doi.org/10.1007 /
s11999-009-0826-6
 104.   Farrokhi S, Pollard CD, Souza RB, Chen Y J, Reischl S, Powers CM. T runk 
position influences the kinematics, kinetics, and muscle activity of the 
lead lower extremity during the forward lunge exercise. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther . 2008;38:403-409. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.2634
 105.   Ferber R, Bolgla L, Earl-Boehm JE, Emery C, Hamstra-Wright K. Strength -
ening of the hip and core versus knee muscles for the treatment of patel -
lofemoral pain: a multicenter randomized controlled trial. J Athl T rain . 
2015;50:366-377 . https:// doi.org/10.4085/1062-6050-49.3.70
 106.   Fithian DC. A historical perspective of anterior knee pain. 
Sports Med Arthrosc Rev . 2001;9:273-281. https:// doi.
org/10.1097 /00132585-200110000-00003
 107.   Fukuda TY , Melo WP , Zaffalon BM, et al. Hip posterolateral musculature 
strengthening in sedentary women with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a 
randomized controlled clinical trial with 1-year follow-up. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther . 2012;42:823-830. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2012.4184
 108.   Fulkerson JP . Diagnosis and treatment of patients with patellofemoral 
pain. Am J Sports Med . 2002;30:447-456. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /036354
65020300032501
 109.   Gajdosik R, Lusin G. Hamstring muscle tightness: reliability of an 
active-knee-extension test. Phys Ther . 1983;63:1085-1088. https:// doi.
org/10.1093/ ptj/63.7 .1085 .
 110.   Gajdosik RL, Rieck MA, Sullivan DK, Wightman SE. Comparison of four 
clinical tests for assessing hamstring muscle length. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 1993;18:614-618. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.1993.18.5.614 .
 111.   George SZ, Beneciuk JM, Bialosky JE, et al. Development of a review-
of-systems screening tool for orthopaedic physical therapists: results 
from the Optimal Screening for Prediction of Referral and Outcome 
(OSPRO) cohort. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2015;45:512-526. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2015.5900
 112.   George SZ, Beneciuk JM, Lentz T A, Wu SS. The Optimal Screening for Pre -
diction of Referral and Outcome (OSPRO) in patients with musculoskeletal 
pain conditions: a longitudinal validation cohort from the USA. BMJ Open . 
2017;7:e015188. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016-015188
 113.   Gerbino PG, 2nd, Griffin ED, d’Hemecourt PA, et al. Patellofemoral 
pain syndrome: evaluation of location and intensity of pain. Clin J Pain . 
2006;22:154-159. https:// doi.org/10.1097 /01.ajp.0000159583.31912.1d
 114.   Ghourbanpour A, T alebi GA, Hosseinzadeh S, Janmohammadi N, T aghi -
pour M. Effects of patellar taping on knee pain, functional disability, and 
patellar alignments in patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a 
randomized clinical trial. J Bodyw Mov Ther . 2018;22:493-497 . https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.jbmt.2017 .06.005
 115.   Giles L, Webster KE, McClelland J, Cook JL. Quadriceps strengthening with 
and without blood flow restriction in the treatment of patellofemoral pain: 
a double-blind randomised trial. Br J Sports Med . 2017;51:1688-1694. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096329
 116.   Giles LS, Webster KE, McClelland JA, Cook J. Does quadriceps atrophy 
exist in individuals with patellofemoral pain? A systematic literature review with meta-analysis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2013;43:766-776. https://
doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.4833
 1 17.   Gil-Gámez J, Pecos-Martín D, Kujala UM, et al. Validation and cultural 
adaptation of “Kujala Score” in Spanish. Knee Surg Sports T raumatol Ar -
throsc . 2016;24:2845-2853. https:// doi.org/10.1007 / s00167-015-3521-z
 118.   Glaviano NR, Baellow A, Saliba S. Physical activity levels in individuals 
with and without patellofemoral pain. Phys Ther Sport . 2017;27:12-16. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.ptsp.2017 .07 .002
 119.   Glaviano NR, Kew M, Hart JM, Saliba S. Demographic and epidemiological 
trends in patellofemoral pain. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2015;10:281-290.
 120.   Graci V , Salsich GB. T runk and lower extremity segment kinematics 
and their relationship to pain following movement instruction during a 
single-leg squat in females with dynamic knee valgus and patellofemo -
ral pain. J Sci Med Sport . 2015;18:343-347 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
jsams.2014.04.011
 121.   Green A, Liles C, Rushton A, Kyte DG. Measurement properties of patient-
reported outcome measures (PROMS) in Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome: 
a systematic review. Man Ther . 2014;19:517-526. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2014.05.013
 122.   Gross MT , Foxworth JL. The role of foot orthoses as an intervention for 
patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2003;33:661-670. https://
doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2003.33.11.661
 123.   Günay E, Sarıkaya S, Özdolap Ş, Büyükuysal Ç. Effectiveness of the kine -
siotaping in the patellofemoral pain syndrome. T urk J Phys Med Rehabil . 
2017;63:299-306. https:// doi.org/10.5606/tftrd.2017 .711
 124.   Guney H, Yuksel I, Kaya D, Doral MN. Correlation between quadriceps to 
hamstring ratio and functional outcomes in patellofemoral pain. Knee . 
2016;23:610-615. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2016.04.004
 125.   Gwynne CR, Curran SA. T wo-dimensional frontal plane projection angle 
can identify subgroups of patellofemoral pain patients who demonstrate 
dynamic knee valgus. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 2018;58:44-48. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2018.06.021
 126.   Haim A, Y aniv M, Dekel S, Amir H. Patellofemoral pain syndrome: validity 
of clinical and radiological features. Clin Orthop Relat Res . 2006;451:223-
228. https:// doi.org/10.1097 /01.blo.0000229284.45485.6c
 1 27.   Hains G, Hains F . Patellofemoral pain syndrome managed by ischemic 
compression to the trigger points located in the peri-patellar and retro-
patellar areas: a randomized clinical trial. Clin Chiropr . 2010;13:201-209. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.clch.2010.05.001
 128.   Halabchi F , Abolhasani M, Mirshahi M, Alizadeh Z. Patellofemoral pain in 
athletes: clinical perspectives. Open Access J Sports Med . 2017;8:189-
203. https:// doi.org/10.2147 /OAJSM.S127359
 129.   Hall R, Barber Foss K, Hewett TE, Myer GD. Sport specialization’s associa -
tion with an increased risk of developing anterior knee pain in adolescent 
female athletes. J Sport Rehabil . 2015;24:31-35. https:// doi.org/10.1123/
jsr.2013-0101
 130.   Hamstra-Wright KL, Earl-Boehm J, Bolgla L, Emery C, Ferber R. Individu -
als with patellofemoral pain have less hip flexibility than controls regard -
less of treatment outcome. Clin J Sport Med . 2017;27:97-103. https:// doi.
org/10.1097 / JSM.0000000000000307
 131.   Harris-Hayes M, Steger-May K, Koh C, Royer NK, Graci V , Salsich GB. Clas -
sification of lower extremity movement patterns based on visual assess -
ment: reliability and correlation with 2-dimensional video analysis. J Athl 
T rain . 2014;49:304-310. https:// doi.org/10.4085/1062-6050-49.2.21
 132.   Harvie D, O’Leary T , Kumar S. A systematic review of randomized con -
trolled trials on exercise parameters in the treatment of patellofemoral 
pain: what works? J Multidiscip Healthc . 2011;4:383-392. https:// doi.
org/10.2147 / JMDH.S24595
 133.   Herbst KA, Barber Foss KD, Fader L, et al. Hip strength is greater in ath -
letes who subsequently develop patellofemoral pain. Am J Sports Med . 
2015;43:2747-2752. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546515599628
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg52   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines 134.   Herrington L. Knee valgus angle during single leg squat and landing in 
patellofemoral pain patients and controls. Knee . 2014;21:514-517 . https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2013.11.011
 135.   Herrington L, Al-Sherhi A. A controlled trial of weight-bearing versus non–
weight-bearing exercises for patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2007;37:155-160. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2007 .2433
 136.   Hespanhol LC, Jr., van Mechelen W, Verhagen E. Effectiveness of online 
tailored advice to prevent running-related injuries and promote preven -
tive behaviour in Dutch trail runners: a pragmatic randomised controlled 
trial. Br J Sports Med . 2018;52:851-858. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2016-097025
 1 37.   Hinman RS, Lentzos J, Vicenzino B, Crossley KM. Is patellofemoral osteo -
arthritis common in middle-aged people with chronic patellofemoral pain? 
Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) . 2014;66:1252-1257 . https:// doi.org/10.1002/
acr.22274
 138.   Ho KY , Hu HH, Colletti PM, Powers CM. Recreational runners with patello -
femoral pain exhibit elevated patella water content. Magn Reson Imaging . 
2014;32:965-968. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.mri.2014.04.018
 139.   Hoglund LT , Burns RO, Stepney AL, Jr. Do males with patellofemoral 
pain have posterolateral hip muscle weakness? Int J Sports Phys Ther . 
2018;13:160-170.
 140.   Hoglund LT , Hillstrom HJ, Barr-Gillespie AE, Lockard MA, Barbe MF , Song 
J. Frontal plane knee and hip kinematics during sit-to-stand and proximal 
lower extremity strength in persons with patellofemoral osteoarthritis: 
a pilot study. J Appl Biomech . 2014;30:82-94. https:// doi.org/10.1123/
jab.2012-0244
 141.   Hoglund LT , Lockard MA, Barbe MF , et al. Physical performance mea -
surement in persons with patellofemoral osteoarthritis: a pilot study. J 
Back Musculoskelet Rehabil . 2015;28:335-342. https:// doi.org/10.3233/
BMR-140525
 142.   Holden S, Boreham C, Doherty C, Delahunt E. T wo-dimensional knee val -
gus displacement as a predictor of patellofemoral pain in adolescent fe -
males. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 2017;27:188-194. https:// doi.org/10.1111/
sms.12633
 143.   Holden S, Rathleff MS, Jensen MB, Barton CJ. How can we implement 
exercise therapy for patellofemoral pain if we don’t know what was pre -
scribed? A systematic review. Br J Sports Med . 2018;52:385. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2017-097547
 144.   Holmes SW, Jr., Clancy WG, Jr. Clinical classification of patellofemoral 
pain and dysfunction. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1998;28:299-306. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.1998.28.5.299
 145.   Hossain M, Alexander P , Burls A, Jobanputra P . Foot orthoses for patel -
lofemoral pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2011:CD008402. 
https:// doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD008402.pub2
 146.   Howe TE, Dawson LJ, Syme G, Duncan L, Reid J. Evaluation of outcome 
measures for use in clinical practice for adults with musculoskeletal 
conditions of the knee: a systematic review. Man Ther . 2012;17:100-118. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2011.07 .002
 147.   Hughes L, Paton B, Rosenblatt B, Gissane C, Patterson SD. Blood flow 
restriction training in clinical musculoskeletal rehabilitation: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2017;51:1003-1011. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-097071
 148.   Insall J. “Chondromalacia patellae”: patellar malalignment syndrome. 
Orthop Clin North Am . 1979;10:117-127 .
 149.   Ittenbach RF , Huang G, Barber Foss KD, Hewett TE, Myer GD. Reliability 
and validity of the Anterior Knee Pain Scale: applications for use as 
an epidemiologic screener. PLoS One . 2016;11:e0159204. https:// doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0159204
 150.   Jayaseelan DJ, Scalzitti DA, Palmer G, Immerman A, Courtney CA. 
The effects of joint mobilization on individuals with patellofemoral 
pain: a systematic review. Clin Rehabil . 2018;32:722-733. https:// doi.
org/10.1177 /0269215517753971 151.   Jordaan G, Schwellnus MP . The incidence of overuse injuries in military 
recruits during basic military training. Mil Med . 1994;159:421-426. https://
doi.org/10.1093/ milmed/159.6.421
 152.   Kannus P , Natri A, Niittymäki S, Järvinen M. Effect of intraarticular glycos -
aminoglycan polysulfate treatment on patellofemoral pain syndrome. A 
prospective, randomized double-blind trial comparing glycosaminoglycan 
polysulfate with placebo and quadriceps muscle exercises. Arthritis 
Rheum . 1992;35:1053-1061. https:// doi.org/10.1002/ art.1780350910
 153.   Kannus P , Natri A, Paakkala T , Järvinen M. An outcome study of chronic 
patellofemoral pain syndrome. Seven-year follow-up of patients in a ran -
domized, controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am . 1999;81:355-363. https://
doi.org/10.2106/00004623-199903000-00007
 154.   Kannus P , Niittymäki S. Which factors predict outcome in the non -
operative treatment of patellofemoral pain syndrome? A prospective 
follow-up study. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 1994;26:289-296. https:// doi.
org/10.1249/00005768-199403000-00004
 155.   Kaufman KR, Brodine S, Shaffer R. Military training-related injuries: 
surveillance, research, and prevention. Am J Prev Med . 2000;18:54-63. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0749-3797(00)00114-8
 156.   Keet JHL, Gray J, Harley Y , Lambert MI. The effect of medial patellar tap -
ing on pain, strength and neuromuscular recruitment in subjects with and 
without patellofemoral pain. Physiotherapy . 2007;93:45-52. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.physio.2006.06.006
 1 57.   Kelley MJ, Shaffer MA, Kuhn JE, et al. Shoulder pain and mobility deficits: 
adhesive capsulitis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2013;43:A1-A31. https://
doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.0302
 158.   Khayambashi K, Fallah A, Movahedi A, Bagwell J, Powers C. Postero -
lateral hip muscle strengthening versus quadriceps strengthening for 
patellofemoral pain: a comparative control trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 
2014;95:900-907 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2013.12.022
 159.   Khayambashi K, Mohammadkhani Z, Ghaznavi K, Lyle MA, Powers CM. 
The effects of isolated hip abductor and external rotator muscle strength -
ening on pain, health status, and hip strength in females with patel -
lofemoral pain: a randomized controlled trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2012;42:22-29. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2012.3704
 160.   Khuman R, Devi S, Anandh V , Kamlesh T , Satani K, Nambi G. Patello-
femoral pain syndrome: a comparative study of mobilization verses [sic] 
taping. Int J Pharm Sci Health Care . 2012;2:89-96.
 161.   Kobayashi S, Pappas E, Fransen M, Refshauge K, Simic M. The prevalence 
of patellofemoral osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage . 2016;24:1697-1707 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
joca.2016.05.011
 162.   Koh JL, Stewart C. Patellar instability. Orthop Clin North Am . 2015;46:147-
157 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.ocl.2014.09.011
 163.   Konan S, Zang TT , T amimi N, Haddad FS. Can the Ottawa and Pittsburgh 
rules reduce requests for radiography in patients referred to acute knee 
clinics? Ann R Coll Surg Engl . 2013;95:188-191. https:// doi.org/10.1308/0
03588413X13511609954699
 164.   Kooiker L, Van De Port IG, Weir A, Moen MH. Effects of physical therapist–
guided quadriceps-strengthening exercises for the treatment of patel -
lofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2014;44:391-402. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2014.4127
 165.   Kramer JF , Vaz MD, Vandervoort AA. Reliability of isometric hip abductor 
torques during examiner- and belt-resisted tests. J Gerontol . 1991;46:M47-
M51. https:// doi.org/10.1093/ geronj/ 46.2.M47
 166.   Kredo T , Bernhardsson S, Machingaidze S, et al. Guide to clinical practice 
guidelines: the current state of play. Int J Qual Health Care . 2016;28:122-
128. https:// doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/ mzv115
 167.   Kuru T , Dereli EE, Y aliman A. Validity of the T urkish version of the Kujala 
patellofemoral score in patellofemoral pain syndrome. Acta Orthop T rau -
matol T urc . 2010;44:152-156. https:// doi.org/10.3944/ AOTT .2010.2252
 168.   Lack S, Barton C, Sohan O, Crossley K, Morrissey D. Proximal muscle 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg53
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesrehabilitation is effective for patellofemoral pain: a systematic review 
with meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2015;49:1365-1376. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2015-094723
 169.   Lake DA, Wofford NH. Effect of therapeutic modalities on patients with 
patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. Sports Health . 
2011;3:182-189. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /1941738111398583
 170.   Lakstein D, Fridman T , Ziv YB, Kosashvili Y . Prevalence of anterior 
knee pain and pes planus in Israel Defense Force recruits. Mil Med . 
2010;175:855-857 . https:// doi.org/10.7205/ milmed-d-09-00145
 171.   Lam S, Amies V . Hip arthritis presenting as knee pain. BMJ Case Rep . 
2015;2015:bcr2014208625. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2014-208625
 172.   Lankhorst NE, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, van Middelkoop M. Factors associated 
with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med . 
2013;47:193-206. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2011-090369
 173.   Lankhorst NE, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, van Middelkoop M. Risk factors for 
patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2012;42:81-94. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2012.3803
 174.   Lankhorst NE, van Middelkoop M, Crossley KM, et al. Factors that predict 
a poor outcome 5–8 years after the diagnosis of patellofemoral pain: a 
multicentre observational analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:881-886. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2015-094664
 175.   Laprade JA, Culham EG. A self-administered pain severity scale for patel -
lofemoral pain syndrome. Clin Rehabil . 2002;16:780-788. https:// doi.
org/10.1191/0269215502cr553oa
 176.   Lee CR, Lee DY , Jeong HS, Lee MH. The effects of Kinesio taping on VMO 
and VL EMG activities during stair ascent and descent by persons with 
patellofemoral pain: a preliminary study. J Phys Ther Sci . 2012;24:153-156. 
https:// doi.org/10.1589/jpts.24.153
 177.   Lee TQ, Morris G, Csintalan RP . The influence of tibial and femoral rotation 
on patellofemoral contact area and pressure. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2003;33:686-693. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2003.33.11.686
 178.   Lentz T A, Beneciuk JM, Bialosky JE, et al. Development of a yellow flag 
assessment tool for orthopaedic physical therapists: results from the Op -
timal Screening for Prediction of Referral and Outcome (OSPRO) cohort. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2016;46:327-343. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2016.6487
 179.   Lesher JM, Dreyfuss P , Hager N, Kaplan M, Furman M. Hip joint pain refer -
ral patterns: a descriptive study. Pain Med . 2008;9:22-25. https:// doi.
org/10.1111/j.1526-4637 .2006.00153.x
 180.   LeVeau BF , Rogers C. Selective training of the vastus medialis muscle 
using EMG biofeedback. Phys Ther . 1980;60:1410-1415. https:// doi.
org/10.1093/ ptj/60.11.1410
 181.   Logerstedt DS, Scalzitti D, Risberg MA, et al. Knee stability and movement 
coordination impairments: knee ligament sprain revision 2017 . J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther . 2017;47:A1-A47 . https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2017 .0303
 182.   Logerstedt DS, Scalzitti DA, Bennell KL, et al. Knee pain and mobility 
impairments: meniscal and articular cartilage lesions revision 2018. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2018;48:A1-A50. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2018.0301
 183.   Logerstedt DS, Snyder-Mackler L, Ritter RC, Axe MJ. Knee pain and mobil -
ity impairments: meniscal and articular cartilage lesions. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther . 2010;40:A1-A35. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2010.0304
 184.   Logerstedt DS, Snyder-Mackler L, Ritter RC, Axe MJ, Godges JJ. Knee 
stability and movement coordination impairments: knee ligament sprain. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2010;40:A1-A37 . https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2010.0303
 185.   Luedke LE, Heiderscheit BC, Williams DS, Rauh MJ. Association of iso -
metric strength of hip and knee muscles with injury risk in high school 
cross country runners. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2015;10:868-876.
 186.   Maclachlan LR, Collins NJ, Matthews MLG, Hodges PW, Vicenzino 
B. The psychological features of patellofemoral pain: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med . 2017;51:732-742. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2016-096705
 1 87.   Maclachlan LR, Matthews M, Hodges PW, Collins NJ, Vicenzino B. The psy -
chological features of patellofemoral pain: a cross-sectional study. Scand 
J Pain . 2018;18:261-271. https:// doi.org/10.1515/ sjpain-2018-0025
 188.   Malliaras P , Cook J, Purdam C, Rio E. Patellar tendinopathy: clinical diag -
nosis, load management, and advice for challenging case presentations. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2015;45:887-898. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2015.5987
 189.   Matthews M, Rathleff MS, Claus A, et al. Can we predict the outcome for 
people with patellofemoral pain? A systematic review on prognostic fac -
tors and treatment effect modifiers. Br J Sports Med . 2017;51:1650-1660. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096545
 190.   McClure PW, Michener LA. Staged approach for rehabilitation classifica -
tion: shoulder disorders (ST AR–Shoulder). Phys Ther . 2015;95:791-800. 
https:// doi.org/10.2522/ ptj.20140156
 191.   McMoreland A, O’Sullivan K, Sainsbury D, Clifford A, McCreesh K. No 
deficit in hip isometric strength or concentric endurance in young females 
with mild patellofemoral pain. Isokinet Exerc Sci . 2011;19:117-125. https://
doi.org/10.3233/IES-2011-0405
 192.   McPoil TG, Vicenzino B, Cornwall MW, Collins N, Warren M. Reliability and 
normative values for the foot mobility magnitude: a composite measure 
of vertical and medial-lateral mobility of the midfoot. J Foot Ankle Res . 
2009;2:6. https:// doi.org/10.1186/1757-1146-2-6
 193.   McPoil TG, Warren M, Vicenzino B, Cornwall MW. Variations in foot posture 
and mobility between individuals with patellofemoral pain and those in 
a control group. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc . 2011;101:289-296. https:// doi.
org/10.7547 /1010289
 194.   Meira EP , Brumitt J. Influence of the hip on patients with patellofemoral 
pain syndrome: a systematic review. Sports Health . 2011;3:455-465. 
https:// doi.org/10.1177 /1941738111415006
 195.   Merchant AC, Fulkerson JP , Leadbetter W. The diagnosis and initial 
treatment of patellofemoral disorders. Am J Orthop (Belle Mead NJ) . 
2017;46:68-75.
 196.   Mills K, Blanch P , Dev P , Martin M, Vicenzino B. A randomised control trial 
of short term efficacy of in-shoe foot orthoses compared with a wait and 
see policy for anterior knee pain and the role of foot mobility. Br J Sports 
Med. 2012;46:247-252. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2011-090204
 1 97.   Mølgaard CM, Rathleff MS, Andreasen J, et al. Foot exercises and foot 
orthoses are more effective than knee focused exercises in individuals 
with patellofemoral pain. J Sci Med Sport . 2018;21:10-15. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.jsams.2017 .05.019
 198.   Moyano FR, Valenza MC, Martin LM, Caballero YC, Gonzalez-Jimenez 
E, Demet GV . Effectiveness of different exercises and stretching phys -
iotherapy on pain and movement in patellofemoral pain syndrome: a 
randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil . 2013;27:409-417 . https:// doi.
org/10.1177 /0269215512459277
 199.   Mucha MD, Caldwell W, Schlueter EL, Walters C, Hassen A. Hip abductor 
strength and lower extremity running related injury in distance runners: 
a systematic review. J Sci Med Sport . 2017;20:349-355. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.jsams.2016.09.002
 200.    Mueller MJ, Maluf KS. Tissue adaptation to physical stress: a proposed 
“Physical Stress Theory” to guide physical therapist practice, education, 
and research. Phys Ther . 2002;82:383-403. https:// doi.org/10.1093/
ptj/82.4.383
 201.   Munro A, Herrington L, Carolan M. Reliability of 2-dimensional video as -
sessment of frontal-plane dynamic knee valgus during common athletic 
screening tasks. J Sport Rehabil . 2012;21:7-11. https:// doi.org/10.1123/
jsr.21.1.7
 202.    Myer GD, Barber Foss KD, Gupta R, Hewett TE, Ittenbach RF . Analysis of 
patient-reported Anterior Knee Pain Scale: implications for scale develop -
ment in children and adolescents. Knee Surg Sports T raumatol Arthrosc . 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg54   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines2016;24:653-660. https:// doi.org/10.1007 / s00167-014-3004-7
 203.    Myer GD, Ford KR, Barber Foss KD, et al. The incidence and poten -
tial pathomechanics of patellofemoral pain in female athletes. Clin 
Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 2010;25:700-707 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
clinbiomech.2010.04.001
 204.    Nascimento LR, T eixeira-Salmela LF , Souza RB, Resende RA. Hip and 
knee strengthening is more effective than knee strengthening alone for 
reducing pain and improving activity in individuals with patellofemoral 
pain: a systematic review with meta-analysis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2018;48:19-31. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2018.7365
 205.    Näslund J, Näslund UB, Odenbring S, Lundeberg T . Comparison of 
symptoms and clinical findings in subgroups of individuals with patel -
lofemoral pain. Physiother Theory Pract . 2006;22:105-118. https:// doi.
org/10.1080/09593980600724246
 206.    Neal BS, Barton CJ, Gallie R, O’Halloran P , Morrissey D. Runners with 
patellofemoral pain have altered biomechanics which targeted interven -
tions can modify: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Gait Posture . 
2016;45:69-82. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2015.11.018
 2 07.   Neal BS, Griffiths IB, Dowling GJ, et al. Foot posture as a risk factor for 
lower limb overuse injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Foot 
Ankle Res . 2014;7:55. https:// doi.org/10.1186/ s13047-014-0055-4
 208.    Negahban H, Pouretezad M, Sohani SM, Mazaheri M, Salavati M, Moham -
madi F . Validation of the Persian version of Functional Index Questionnaire 
(FIQ) and Modified FIQ in patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome. 
Physiother Theory Pract . 2013;29:521-530. https:// doi.org/10.3109/0959
3985.2012.761308
 209.    Negahban H, Pouretezad M, Y azdi MJ, et al. Persian translation and vali -
dation of the Kujala Patellofemoral Scale in patients with patellofemoral 
pain syndrome. Disabil Rehabil . 2012;34:2259-2263. https:// doi.org/10.3
109/09638288.2012.683480
 210.   Nijs J, Van Geel C, Van der auwera C, Van de Velde B. Diagnostic value of 
five clinical tests in patellofemoral pain syndrome. Man Ther . 2006;11:69-
7 7.  https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2005.04.002
 211.   Nimon G, Murray D, Sandow M, Goodfellow J. Natural history of anterior 
knee pain: a 14- to 20-year follow-up of nonoperative management. J Pedi -
atr Orthop . 1998;18:118-122.
 212.   Noehren B, Scholz J, Davis I. The effect of real-time gait retraining on 
hip kinematics, pain and function in subjects with patellofemoral pain 
syndrome. Br J Sports Med . 2011;45:691-696. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsm.2009.069112
 213.   Noehren B, Shuping L, Jones A, Akers DA, Bush HM, Sluka KA. So -
matosensory and biomechanical abnormalities in females with patel -
lofemoral pain. Clin J Pain . 2016;32:915-919. https:// doi.org/10.1097 /
AJP .0000000000000331
 214.   Nunes GS, Barton CJ, Serrão FV . Hip rate of force development and 
strength are impaired in females with patellofemoral pain without signs 
of altered gluteus medius and maximus morphology. J Sci Med Sport . 
2018;21:123-128. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2017 .05.014
 215.   Nunes GS, Stapait EL, Kirsten MH, de Noronha M, Santos GM. Clinical test 
for diagnosis of patellofemoral pain syndrome: systematic review with 
meta-analysis. Phys Ther Sport . 2013;14:54-59. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
ptsp.2012.11.003
 216.   Oakes JL, McCandless P , Selfe J. Exploration of the current evidence 
base for the incidence and prevalence of patellofemoral pain syndrome. 
Phys Ther Rev . 2009;14:382-387 . https:// doi.org/10.1179/10833190
9X12488667117177
 2 17.   Østerås B, Østerås H, T orstensen T A. Long-term effects of medical exercise 
therapy in patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome: results from a 
single-blinded randomized controlled trial with 12 months follow-up. Phys -
iotherapy . 2013;99:311-316. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.physio.2013.04.001
 218.   Østerås B, Østerås H, T orstensen T A, Vasseljen O. Dose–response effects 
of medical exercise therapy in patients with patellofemoral pain syn -drome: a randomised controlled clinical trial. Physiotherapy . 2013;99:126-
131. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.physio.2012.05.009
 219.   Panken AM, Heymans MW, van Oort L, Verhagen AP . Clinical prognostic 
factors for patients with anterior knee pain in physical therapy; a system -
atic review. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2015;10:929-945.
 220.    Papadopoulos C, Constantinou A, Cheimonidou AZ, Stasinopoulos D. 
Greek cultural adaption and validation of the Kujala anterior knee pain 
scale in patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome. Disabil Rehabil . 
2017;39:704-708. https:// doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2016.1161834
 221.   Papadopoulos C, Nardi L, Antoniadou M, Stasinopoulos D. Greek ad -
aptation and validation of the Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome Severity 
Scale. Hong Kong Physiother J . 2013;31:95-99. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
hkpj.2013.05.003
 222.   Papadopoulos K, Stasinopoulos D, Ganchev D. A systematic re -
view of reviews in patellofemoral pain syndrome. Exploring the 
risk factors, diagnostic tests, outcome measurements and ex -
ercise treatment. Open Sports Med J . 2015;9:7-17 . https:// doi.
org/10.2174/1874387001509010007
 223.   Pappas E, Wong- T om WM. Prospective predictors of patellofemoral 
pain syndrome: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Health . 
2012;4:115-120. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /1941738111432097
 224.    Park SK, Stefanyshyn DJ. Greater Q angle may not be a risk factor of 
Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 2011;26:392-
396. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2010.11.015
 225.   Patel DR, Nelson TL. Sports injuries in adolescents. Med Clin North Am . 
2000;84:983-1007 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0025-7125(05)70270-4
 226.    Patle S, Bhave S. A study on the efficacy of manual therapy as an inter -
vention to supervised exercise therapy in patients with anterior knee pain: 
a randomised controlled trial. Indian J Physiother Occup Ther . 2015;9:92-
96. https:// doi.org/10.5958/0973-5674.2015.00060.X
 227.   Peat G, Bergknut C, Frobell R, Jöud A, Englund M. Population-wide inci -
dence estimates for soft tissue knee injuries presenting to healthcare in 
southern Sweden: data from the Skåne Healthcare Register. Arthritis Res 
Ther. 2014;16:R162. https:// doi.org/10.1186/ ar4678
 228.    Peters JS, T yson NL. Proximal exercises are effective in treating patel -
lofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 
2013;8:689-700.
 229.   Phillips B, Ball C, Sackett D, et al. Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medi -
cine - Levels of Evidence (March 2009). Available at: http://www.cebm.
net/index.aspx?o=1025 . Accessed August 4, 2009.
 230.    Piva SR, Fitzgerald K, Irrgang JJ, et al. Reliability of measures of impair -
ments associated with patellofemoral pain syndrome. BMC Musculoske -
let Disord . 2006;7:33. https:// doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-7-33
 231.   Piva SR, Gil AB, Moore CG, Fitzgerald GK. Responsiveness of the activities 
of daily living scale of the Knee Outcome Survey and Numeric Pain Rating 
Scale in patients with patellofemoral pain. J Rehabil Med . 2009;41:129-
135. https:// doi.org/10.2340/16501977-0295
 232.   Piva SR, Goodnite EA, Childs JD. Strength around the hip and flexibility of 
soft tissues in individuals with and without patellofemoral pain syndrome. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2005;35:793-801. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2005.35.12.793
 233.   Poppert E, Kulig K. Hip degenerative joint disease in a patient with 
medial knee pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2011;41:33. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2011.0402
 234.    Post WR. Current concepts: clinical evaluation of patients with patello -
femoral disorders. Arthroscopy . 1999;15:841-851. https:// doi.org/10.1053/
ar.1999.v15.015084
 235.   Post WR, Dye SF . Patellofemoral pain: an enigma explained by homeosta -
sis and common sense. Am J Orthop (Belle Mead NJ) . 2017;46:92-100.
 236.    Powers CM. The influence of abnormal hip mechanics on knee injury: a 
biomechanical perspective. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2010;40:42-51. 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg55
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelineshttps:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2010.3337
 237.   Powers CM. The influence of altered lower-extremity kinematics on 
patellofemoral joint dysfunction: a theoretical perspective. J Or-
thop Sports Phys Ther . 2003;33:639-646. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2003.33.11.639
 238.    Powers CM, Heino JG, Rao S, Perry J. The influence of patellofemoral 
pain on lower limb loading during gait. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 
1999;14:722-728. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0268-0033(99)00019-4
 239.   Powers CM, Ho KY , Chen Y J, Souza RB, Farrokhi S. Patellofemoral joint 
stress during weight-bearing and non–weight-bearing quadriceps exercis -
es. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2014;44:320-327 . https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2014.4936
 240.    Powers CM, Witvrouw E, Davis IS, Crossley KM. Evidence-based 
framework for a pathomechanical model of patellofemoral pain: 2017 
patellofemoral pain consensus statement from the 4th International 
Patellofemoral Pain Research Retreat, Manchester, UK: part 3. Br J Sports 
Med. 2017;51:1713-1723. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2017-098717
 241.   Prins MR, van der Wurff P . Females with patellofemoral pain syndrome 
have weak hip muscles: a systematic review. Aust J Physiother . 
2009;55:9-15. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0004-9514(09)70055-8
 242.    Rabin A, Kozol Z, Moran U, Efergan A, Geffen Y , Finestone AS. Factors as -
sociated with visually assessed quality of movement during a lateral step-
down test among individuals with patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther . 2014;44:937-946. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2014.5507
 243.    Ramskov D, Barton C, Nielsen RO, Rasmussen S. High eccentric hip 
abduction strength reduces the risk of developing patellofemoral pain 
among novice runners initiating a self-structured running program: a 
1-year observational study. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2015;45:153-161. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2015.5091
 244.    Rathleff CR, Olesen JL, Roos EM, Rasmussen S, Rathleff MS. Half of 
12-15-year-olds with knee pain still have pain after one year. Dan Med J . 
2013;60:A4725.
 245.   Rathleff MS, Rathleff CR, Crossley KM, Barton CJ. Is hip strength a 
risk factor for patellofemoral pain? A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2014;48:1088. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2013-093305
 246.    Rathleff MS, Rathleff CR, Olesen JL, Rasmussen S, Roos EM. Is knee pain 
during adolescence a self-limiting condition? Prognosis of patellofemoral 
pain and other types of knee pain. Am J Sports Med . 2016;44:1165-1171. 
https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546515622456
 247.   Rathleff MS, Roos EM, Olesen JL, Rasmussen S. Exercise during school 
hours when added to patient education improves outcome for 2 years in 
adolescent patellofemoral pain: a cluster randomised trial. Br J Sports 
Med. 2015;49:406-412. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093929
 248.    Redmond AC, Crane YZ, Menz HB. Normative values for the Foot Posture 
Index. J Foot Ankle Res . 2008;1:6. https:// doi.org/10.1186/1757-1146-1-6
 249.   Redmond AC, Crosbie J, Ouvrier RA. Development and validation of 
a novel rating system for scoring standing foot posture: the Foot Pos -
ture Index. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 2006;21:89-98. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2005.08.002
 250.    Regelski CL, Ford BL, Hoch MC. Hip strengthening compared with quadri -
ceps strengthening in conservative treatment of patients with patellofem -
oral pain: a critically appraised topic. Int J Athl Ther T rain . 2015;20:4-12. 
https:// doi.org/10.1123/ijatt.2014-0048
 251.   Reiman MP , Bolgla LA, Loudon JK. A literature review of studies evaluat -
ing gluteus maximus and gluteus medius activation during rehabilitation 
exercises. Physiother Theory Pract . 2012;28:257-268. https:// doi.org/10.3
109/09593985.2011.604981
 252.    Roper JL, Harding EM, Doerfler D, et al. The effects of gait retrain -
ing in runners with patellofemoral pain: a randomized trial. Clin 
Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 2016;35:14-22. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
clinbiomech.2016.03.010 253.   Salsich GB, Perman WH. Patellofemoral joint contact area is influenced 
by tibiofemoral rotation alignment in individuals who have patello -
femoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2007;37:521-528. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2007 .37 .9.521
 254.    Sandow MJ, Goodfellow JW. The natural history of anterior knee pain in 
adolescents. J Bone Joint Surg Br . 1985;67:36-38.
 255.   Schiphof D, van Middelkoop M, de Klerk BM, et al. Crepitus is a first 
indication of patellofemoral osteoarthritis (and not of tibiofemoral 
osteoarthritis). Osteoarthritis Cartilage . 2014;22:631-638. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.joca.2014.02.008
 256.    Schutzer SF , Ramsby GR, Fulkerson JP . Computed tomographic clas -
sification of patellofemoral pain patients. Orthop Clin North Am . 
1986;17:235-248.
 2 57.   Seaberg DC, Jackson R. Clinical decision rule for knee ra -
diographs. Am J Emerg Med . 1994;12:541-543. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/0735-6757(94)90274-7
 258.    Selfe J, Callaghan M, Witvrouw E, et al. T argeted interventions for patello -
femoral pain syndrome (TIPPS): classification of clinical subgroups. BMJ 
Open . 2013;3:e003795. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003795
 259.   Selfe J, Harper L, Pedersen I, Breen- T urner J, Waring J. Four outcome 
measures for patellofemoral joint problems: part 1. Development and 
validity. Physiotherapy . 2001;87:507-515. https:// doi.org/10.1016/
S0031-9406(05)65448-X
 260.    Selfe J, Harper L, Pedersen I, Breen- T urner J, Waring J. Four outcome 
measures for patellofemoral joint problems: part 2. Reliability and clini -
cal sensitivity. Physiotherapy . 2001;87:516-522. https:// doi.org/10.1016/
S0031-9406(05)65449-1
 261.   Selfe J, Janssen J, Callaghan M, et al. Are there three main sub -
groups within the patellofemoral pain population? A detailed charac -
terisation study of 127 patients to help develop targeted intervention 
(TIPPs). Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:873-880. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2015-094792
 262.    Selhorst M, Rice W, Degenhart T , Jackowski M, T atman M. Evaluation of 
a treatment algorithm for patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a 
pilot study. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2015;10:178-188.
 263.    Sell KE, Verity TM, Worrell TW, Pease BJ, Wigglesworth J. T wo measure -
ment techniques for assessing subtalar joint position: a reliability study. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1994;19:162-167 . https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.1994.19.3.162
 264.    Semciw A, Neate R, Pizzari T . Running related gluteus medius function in 
health and injury: a systematic review with meta-analysis. J Electromyogr 
Kinesiol . 2016;30:98-110. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2016.06.005
 265.    Siqueira DA, Baraúna MA, Dionísio VC. Functional evaluation of the knee 
in subjects with patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS): comparison 
between KOS and IKDC scales. Rev Bras Med Esporte . 2012;18:400-403. 
https:// doi.org/10.1590/S1517-86922012000600011
 266.    Smith BE, Moffatt F , Hendrick P , et al. The experience of living with 
patellofemoral pain—loss, confusion and fear-avoidance: a UK 
qualitative study. BMJ Open . 2018;8:e018624. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2017-018624
 267.   Smith TO, Drew BT , Meek TH, Clark AB. Knee orthoses for treating patel -
lofemoral pain syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2015:CD010513. 
https:// doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010513.pub2
 268.    Song CY , Lin YF , Wei TC, Lin DH, Y en TY , Jan MH. Surplus value of hip 
adduction in leg-press exercise in patients with patellofemoral pain 
syndrome: a randomized controlled trial. Phys Ther . 2009;89:409-418. 
https:// doi.org/10.2522/ ptj.20080195
 269.   Stakes NO, Myburgh C, Brantingham JW, Moyer RJ, Jensen M, Globe G. A 
prospective randomized clinical trial to determine efficacy of combined 
spinal manipulation and patella mobilization compared to patella mo -
bilization alone in the conservative management of patellofemoral pain 
syndrome. J Am Chiropr Assoc . 2006;43:11-18.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg56   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines 270.   Stathopulu E, Baildam E. Anterior knee pain: a long-term follow-up. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) . 2003;42:380-382. https:// doi.org/10.1093/
rheumatology/keg093
 271.   Steinberg N, T enenbaum S, Hershkovitz I, Zeev A, Siev-Ner I. Lower 
extremity and spine characteristics in young dancers with and without 
patellofemoral pain. Res Sports Med . 2017;25:166-180. https:// doi.org/10.
1080/15438627 .2017 .1282355
 272.   Sullivan MJ, Bishop SR, Pivik J. The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: devel -
opment and validation. Psychol Assess . 1995;7:524-532. https:// doi.
org/10.1037 /1040-3590.7 .4.524
 273.   Sutlive TG, Mitchell SD, Maxfield SN, et al. Identification of individuals 
with patellofemoral pain whose symptoms improved after a combined 
program of foot orthosis use and modified activity: a preliminary investi -
gation. Phys Ther . 2004;84:49-61. https:// doi.org/10.1093/ ptj/84.1.49
 274.   Swart NM, van Linschoten R, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, van Middelkoop M. 
The additional effect of orthotic devices on exercise therapy for patients 
with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med . 
2012;46:570-577 . https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2010.080218
 275.   Sweitzer BA, Cook C, Steadman JR, Hawkins RJ, Wyland DJ. The inter-rat -
er reliability and diagnostic accuracy of patellar mobility tests in patients 
with anterior knee pain. Phys Sportsmed . 2010;38:90-96. https:// doi.
org/10.3810/ psm.2010.10.1813
 276.   T an JM, Crossley KM, Vicenzino B, Menz HB, Munteanu SE, Collins 
NJ. Age-related differences in foot mobility in individuals with patel -
lofemoral pain. J Foot Ankle Res . 2018;11:5. https:// doi.org/10.1186/
s13047-018-0249-2
 277.   T aunton JE, Ryan MB, Clement DB, McKenzie DC, Lloyd-Smith DR, Zumbo 
BD. A retrospective case-control analysis of 2002 running injuries. Br J 
Sports Med . 2002;36:95-101. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.36.2.95
 278.   T enforde AS, Sayres LC, McCurdy ML, Collado H, Sainani KL, Freder -
icson M. Overuse injuries in high school runners: lifetime prevalence 
and prevention strategies. PM R . 2011;3:125-131; quiz 131. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.pmrj.2010.09.009
 279.   Thijs Y , De Clercq D, Roosen P , Witvrouw E. Gait-related intrinsic risk fac -
tors for patellofemoral pain in novice recreational runners. Br J Sports 
Med. 2008;42:466-471. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2008.046649
 280.    Thijs Y , Pattyn E, Van Tiggelen D, Rombaut L, Witvrouw E. Is hip muscle 
weakness a predisposing factor for patellofemoral pain in female novice 
runners? A prospective study. Am J Sports Med . 2011;39:1877-1882. 
https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546511407617
 281.   Thijs Y , Van Tiggelen D, Roosen P , De Clercq D, Witvrouw E. A prospec -
tive study on gait-related intrinsic risk factors for patellofemoral 
pain. Clin J Sport Med . 2007;17:437-445. https:// doi.org/10.1097 /
JSM.0b013e31815ac44f
 282.    Thomas MJ, Wood L, Selfe J, Peat G. Anterior knee pain in younger 
adults as a precursor to subsequent patellofemoral osteoarthritis: a 
systematic review. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . 2010;11:201. https:// doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2474-11-201
 283.    Thomeé R, Renström P , Karlsson J, Grimby G. Patellofemoral pain 
syndrome in young women: II. Muscle function in patients and healthy 
controls. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 1995;5:245-251. https:// doi.
org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.1995.tb00041.x
 284.    Ummels PE, Lenssen AF , Barendrecht M, Beurskens AJ. Reliability of the 
Dutch translation of the Kujala Patellofemoral Score Questionnaire. Phys -
iother Res Int . 2017;22:e1649. https:// doi.org/10.1002/ pri.1649
 285.    Utting MR, Davies G, Newman JH. Is anterior knee pain a predisposing 
factor to patellofemoral osteoarthritis? Knee . 2005;12:362-365. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2004.12.006
 286.    Van Cant J, Pineux C, Pitance L, Feipel V . Hip muscle strength and endur -
ance in females with patellofemoral pain: a systematic review with meta-
analysis. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2014;9:564-582.
 287.   Van Cant J, Pitance L, Feipel V . Hip abductor, trunk extensor and ankle plantar flexor endurance in females with and without patellofemoral pain. 
J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil . 2017;30:299-307 . https:// doi.org/10.3233/
BMR-150505
 288.    van der Heijden RA, de Kanter JL, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, et al. Structural 
abnormalities on magnetic resonance imaging in patients with patel -
lofemoral pain: a cross-sectional case-control study. Am J Sports Med . 
2016;44:2339-2346. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546516646107
 289.   van der Heijden RA, Lankhorst NE, van Linschoten R, Bierma-Zeinstra 
SM, van Middelkoop M. Exercise for treating patellofemoral pain syn -
drome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2015;1:CD010387 . https:// doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD010387 .pub2
 290.    Van Der Heijden RA, Lankhorst NE, Van Linschoten R, Bierma-Zeinstra 
SM, Van Middelkoop M. Exercise for treating patellofemoral pain syn -
drome: an abridged version of Cochrane systematic review. Eur J Phys 
Rehabil Med . 2016;52:110-133.
 291.   van der Heijden RA, Oei EH, Bron EE, et al. No difference on quantitative 
magnetic resonance imaging in patellofemoral cartilage composition be -
tween patients with patellofemoral pain and healthy controls. Am J Sports 
Med. 2016;44:1172-1178. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546516632507
 292.    van Linschoten R, van Middelkoop M, Berger MY , et al. Supervised exer -
cise therapy versus usual care for patellofemoral pain syndrome: an open 
label randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2009;339:b4074. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bmj.b4074
 293.   van Middelkoop M, Bennell KL, Callaghan MJ, et al. International patel -
lofemoral osteoarthritis consortium: consensus statement on the diag -
nosis, burden, outcome measures, prognosis, risk factors and treatment. 
Semin Arthritis Rheum . 2018;47:666-675. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
semarthrit.2017 .09.009
 294.    van Middelkoop M, van der Heijden RA, Bierma-Zeinstra SMA. Character -
istics and outcome of patellofemoral pain in adolescents: do they differ 
from adults? J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2017;47:801-805. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2017 .7326
 295.    Van Tiggelen D, Witvrouw E, Coorevits P , Croisier JL, Roget P . Analysis 
of isokinetic parameters in the development of anterior knee pain 
syndrome: a prospective study in a military setting. Isokinet Exerc Sci . 
2004;12:223-228. https:// doi.org/10.3233/IES-2004-0178
 296.    Vicenzino B, Collins N, Cleland J, McPoil T . A clinical prediction rule for 
identifying patients with patellofemoral pain who are likely to benefit 
from foot orthoses: a preliminary determination. Br J Sports Med . 
2010;44:862-866. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2008.052613
 297.   Waddell G, Newton M, Henderson I, Somerville D, Main CJ. A Fear-Avoid -
ance Beliefs Questionnaire (FABQ) and the role of fear-avoidance beliefs 
in chronic low back pain and disability. Pain. 1993;52:157-168. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/0304-3959(93)90127-B
 298.    Waryasz GR, McDermott A Y . Patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS): a sys -
tematic review of anatomy and potential risk factors. Dyn Med . 2008;7:9. 
https:// doi.org/10.1186/1476-5918-7-9
 299.    Wasielewski NJ, Parker TM, Kotsko KM. Evaluation of electromyographic 
biofeedback for the quadriceps femoris: a systematic review. J Athl T rain . 
2011;46:543-554. https:// doi.org/10.4085/1062-6050-46.5.543
 300.    Watson CJ, Leddy HM, Dynjan TD, Parham JL. Reliability of the lateral pull 
test and tilt test to assess patellar alignment in subjects with symptom -
atic knees: student raters. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2001;31:368-374. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2001.31.7 .368
 301.   Watson CJ, Propps M, Galt W, Redding A, Dobbs D. Reliability of McCon -
nell’s classification of patellar orientation in symptomatic and asymptom -
atic subjects. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1999;29:378-385; discussion 
386-393. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.1999.29.7 .378
 302.    Watson CJ, Propps M, Ratner J, Zeigler DL, Horton P , Smith SS. Reli -
ability and responsiveness of the Lower Extremity Functional Scale 
and the Anterior Knee Pain Scale in patients with anterior knee pain. J 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2005;35:136-146. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg57
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesjospt.2005.35.3.136
 303.    Weatherall M. Information provided by diagnostic and screening tests: 
improving probabilities. Postgrad Med J . 2018;94:230-235. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/ postgradmedj-2017-135273
 304.    Weishaar MD, McMillian DM, Moore JH. Identification and manage -
ment of 2 femoral shaft stress injuries. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2005;35:665-673. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2005.35.10.665
 305.    Whittingham M, Palmer S, Macmillan F . Effects of taping on pain and 
function in patellofemoral pain syndrome: a randomized controlled trial. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2004;34:504-510. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2004.34.9.504
 306.    Wilk KE, Davies GJ, Mangine RE, Malone TR. Patellofemoral disorders: 
a classification system and clinical guidelines for nonoperative reha -
bilitation. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1998;28:307-322. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.1998.28.5.307
 3 07.   Willson JD, Davis IS. Utility of the frontal plane projection angle in females 
with patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2008;38:606-615. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.2706
 308.    Willson JD, Ireland ML, Davis I. Core strength and lower extremity align -
ment during single leg squats. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2006;38:945-952. 
https:// doi.org/10.1249/01.mss.0000218140.05074.fa
 309.    Willy RW, Scholz JP , Davis IS. Mirror gait retraining for the treatment 
of patellofemoral pain in female runners. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 
2012;27:1045-1051. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2012.07 .011
 310.   Witvrouw E, Callaghan MJ, Stefanik JJ, et al. Patellofemoral pain: 
consensus statement from the 3rd International Patellofemoral Pain 
Research Retreat held in Vancouver, September 2013. Br J Sports Med . 
2014;48:411-414. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093450
 311.   Witvrouw E, Crossley K, Davis I, McConnell J, Powers CM. The 3rd Interna -
tional Patellofemoral Research Retreat: an international expert consensus 
meeting to improve the scientific understanding and clinical manage -
ment of patellofemoral pain. Br J Sports Med . 2014;48:408. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093437
 312.   Witvrouw E, Danneels L, Van Tiggelen D, Willems TM, Cambier D. Open 
versus closed kinetic chain exercises in patellofemoral pain: a 5-year pro -
spective randomized study. Am J Sports Med . 2004;32:1122-1130. https://
doi.org/10.1177 /0363546503262187
 313.   Witvrouw E, Lysens R, Bellemans J, Cambier D, Vanderstraeten G. Intrinsic risk factors for the development of anterior knee pain in an athletic popu -
lation. A two-year prospective study. Am J Sports Med . 2000;28:480-489. 
https:// doi.org/10.1177 /03635465000280040701
 314.   Witvrouw E, Lysens R, Bellemans J, Peers K, Vanderstraeten G. Open ver -
sus closed kinetic chain exercises for patellofemoral pain. A prospective, 
randomized study. Am J Sports Med . 2000;28:687-694. https:// doi.org/1
0.1177 /03635465000280051201
 315.   Witvrouw E, Werner S, Mikkelsen C, Van Tiggelen D, Vanden Berghe L, 
Cerulli G. Clinical classification of patellofemoral pain syndrome: guide -
lines for non-operative treatment. Knee Surg Sports T raumatol Arthrosc . 
2005;13:122-130. https:// doi.org/10.1007 / s00167-004-0577-6
 316.   Wolf M. Knee pain in children: part I: evaluation. Pediatr Rev . 2016;37:18-
23; quiz 24, 47 . https:// doi.org/10.1542/ pir.2015-0040
 3 17.   Wolf M. Knee pain in children, part II: limb- and life-threatening conditions, 
hip pathology, and effusion. Pediatr Rev . 2016;37:72-76; quiz 77 . https://
doi.org/10.1542/ pir.2015-0041
 318.   Wolf M. Knee pain in children, part III: stress injuries, benign bone tu -
mors, growing pains. Pediatr Rev . 2016;37:114-118; quiz 119. https:// doi.
org/10.1542/ pir.2015-0042
 319.   World Health Organization. International Classification of Functioning, Dis -
ability and Health: ICF . Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 
2009.
 320.    Wyndow N, Collins N, Vicenzino B, T ucker K, Crossley K. Is there a 
biomechanical link between patellofemoral pain and osteoarthritis? A 
narrative review. Sports Med . 2016;46:1797-1808. https:// doi.org/10.1007 /
s40279-016-0545-6
 321.   Yip SL, Ng GY . Biofeedback supplementation to physiotherapy exercise 
programme for rehabilitation of patellofemoral pain syndrome: a random -
ized controlled pilot study. Clin Rehabil . 2006;20:1050-1057 . https:// doi.
org/10.1177 /0269215506071259
 322.   Y oung JL, Rhon DI, Cleland JA, Snodgrass SJ. The influence of exercise 
dosing on outcomes in patients with knee disorders: a systematic review. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2018;48:146-161. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2018.7637
@MORE INFORMATION
WWW.JOSPT .ORG
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg58   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
SEARCH STRATEGIES FOR ALL DATABASES 
SEARCHED: MAY 2018
MEDLINE/PubMed
((patellofemoral pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral syndrom* [tw] 
OR patello-femoral pain* [tw] OR patello-femoral syndrom* [tw] 
OR anterior knee pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral disorder* [tw] 
OR patello-femoral disorder* [tw] OR chondromalacia patellae 
[TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding 
Larsen Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom* [TW] OR Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom* [TW] 
OR runner’s knee [TW] OR PFPS [TW] OR extensor mechanism 
disorder* [tw]) OR ((arthralg* [tw] OR pain* [tw]) AND (patell* 
[tw] OR femoropatell* [tw] OR femoro-patell* [tw] OR retropatell* 
[tw] OR retro-patell* [tw] OR lateral facet* [tw] OR lateral compr* 
[tw] OR lateral press* [tw] OR odd facet* [tw]) AND (syndrom* 
[tw] OR dysfunct* [tw] OR disorder* [tw] OR chondromal* [tw] 
OR chondropath* [tw]))) AND (classif* [TW])
((patellofemoral pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral syndrom* [tw] 
OR patello-femoral pain* [tw] OR patello-femoral syndrom* [tw] 
OR anterior knee pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral disorder* [tw] 
OR patello-femoral disorder* [tw] OR chondromalacia patellae 
[TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding 
Larsen Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom* [TW] OR Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom* [TW] 
OR runner’s knee [TW] OR PFPS [TW] OR extensor mechanism 
disorder* [tw]) OR ((arthralg* [tw] OR pain* [tw]) AND (patell* 
[tw] OR femoropatell* [tw] OR femoro-patell* [tw] OR retropatell* 
[tw] OR retro-patell* [tw] OR lateral facet* [tw] OR lateral compr* 
[tw] OR lateral press* [tw] OR odd facet* [tw]) AND (syndrom* 
[tw] OR dysfunct* [tw] OR disorder* [tw] OR chondromal* [tw] 
OR chondropath* [tw]))) AND (associat* [tw] OR risk* [tw] OR 
probabil* [tw] OR odds* [tw] OR relat* [tw] OR prevalen* [tw] OR 
predict* [tw] OR caus* [tw] OR etiol* [tw] OR interact* [tw])
((patellofemoral pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral syndrom* [tw] 
OR patello-femoral pain* [tw] OR patello-femoral syndrom* [tw] 
OR anterior knee pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral disorder* [tw] 
OR patello-femoral disorder* [tw] OR chondromalacia patellae 
[TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding 
Larsen Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom* [TW] OR Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom* [TW] 
OR runner’s knee [TW] OR PFPS [TW] OR extensor mechanism 
disorder* [tw]) OR ((arthralg* [tw] OR pain* [tw]) AND (patell* 
[tw] OR femoropatell* [tw] OR femoro-patell* [tw] OR retropatell* 
[tw] OR retro-patell* [tw] OR lateral facet* [tw] OR lateral compr* 
[tw] OR lateral press* [tw] OR odd facet* [tw]) AND (syndrom* 
[tw] OR dysfunct* [tw] OR disorder* [tw] OR chondromal* [tw] 
OR chondropath* [tw]))) AND (prevalence [MH] OR incidence 
[MH] OR epidemiology [MH])
((patellofemoral pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral syndrom* [tw] OR patello-femoral pain* [tw] OR patello-femoral syndrom* [tw] 
OR anterior knee pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral disorder* [tw] 
OR patello-femoral disorder* [tw] OR chondromalacia patellae 
[TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding 
Larsen Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom* [TW] OR Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom* [TW] 
OR runner’s knee [TW] OR PFPS [TW] OR extensor mechanism 
disorder* [tw]) OR ((arthralg* [tw] OR pain* [tw]) AND (patell* 
[tw] OR femoropatell* [tw] OR femoro-patell* [tw] OR retro -
patell* [tw] OR retro-patell* [tw] OR lateral facet* [tw] OR lateral 
compr* [tw] OR lateral press* [tw] OR odd facet* [tw]) AND 
(syndrom* [tw] OR dysfunct* [tw] OR disorder* [tw] OR chon -
dromal* [tw] OR chondropath* [tw]))) AND (sensitiv* [tiab] OR 
sensitivity and specificity [MH] OR diagnos* [tiab] OR diagnosis 
[MeSH:noexp] OR diagnostic [MeSH:noexp] OR diagnosis, dif -
ferential [MeSH:noexp] OR diagnosis [Subheading:noexp] OR 
questionnaires [MH] OR “disability evaluation” [mesh:noexp] 
OR questionnaire [tiab] OR questionnaires [tiab] OR instrument 
[tiab] OR instruments [tiab] OR scale [tiab] OR scales [tiab] OR 
measurement [tiab] OR measurements [tiab] OR index [tiab] OR 
indices [tiab] OR score [tiab] OR scores [tiab])
((patellofemoral pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral syndrom* [tw] 
OR patello-femoral pain* [tw] OR patello-femoral syndrom* [tw] 
OR anterior knee pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral disorder* [tw] 
OR patello-femoral disorder* [tw] OR chondromalacia patellae 
[TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding 
Larsen Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom* [TW] OR Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom* [TW] 
OR runner’s knee [TW] OR PFPS [TW] OR extensor mechanism 
disorder* [tw]) OR ((arthralg* [tw] OR pain* [tw]) AND (patell* 
[tw] OR femoropatell* [tw] OR femoro-patell* [tw] OR retropatell* 
[tw] OR retro-patell* [tw] OR lateral facet* [tw] OR lateral compr* 
[tw] OR lateral press* [tw] OR odd facet* [tw]) AND (syndrom* 
[tw] OR dysfunct* [tw] OR disorder* [tw] OR chondromal* [tw] 
OR chondropath* [tw]))) AND (prognos* [tw] OR return to work 
[tw] OR return to work [mh] OR return to sport [tw])
((patellofemoral pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral syndrom* [tw] OR 
patello-femoral pain* [tw] OR patello-femoral syndrom* [tw] OR 
anterior knee pain* [tw] OR patellofemoral disorder* [tw] OR 
patello-femoral disorder* [tw] OR chondromalacia patellae [TW] 
OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease* [TW] OR Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syn -
drom* [TW] OR Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom* [TW] OR 
runner’s knee [TW] OR PFPS [TW] OR extensor mechanism dis -
order* [tw]) OR ((arthralg* [tw] OR pain* [tw]) AND (patell* [tw] 
OR femoropatell* [tw] OR femoro-patell* [tw] OR retropatell* [tw] 
OR retro-patell* [tw] OR lateral facet* [tw] OR lateral compr* [tw] 
OR lateral press* [tw] OR odd facet* [tw]) AND (syndrom* [tw] 
OR dysfunct* [tw] OR disorder* [tw] OR chondromal* [tw] OR 
chondropath* [tw]))) AND (physical therapy modalities [MH] OR 
recovery of function [MH] OR rehabilitation [MH] OR therapeutics 
[MH] OR physical therap* [TW] OR physiother* [TW] OR recov -
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg59
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
er* [TW] OR restor* [TW] OR re-educat* [TW] OR early ambula -
tion [MH] OR strengthen* [TW] OR resistance training [MH] OR 
resistance method* [TW] OR exercise therapy [MH] OR stretch* 
[TW] OR biofeedback, psychology [MH] OR neuromuscular 
electrical stimulation* [TW] OR pain management [MH] OR pain 
measurement [MH] OR mobiliz* [TW] OR muscle stretching ex -
ercises [MH] OR manipulation, spinal [MH] OR ultrasonograph* 
[TW] OR ultrasound* [TW] OR acupunctur* [TW] OR laser* [TW] 
OR patient education as topic [MH] OR electrical stimulation 
[MH] OR electrical stimulation therapy [MH] OR T ranscutaneous 
electric nerve stimulation [MH] OR tap* [TW] OR brac* [TW] 
OR orthotic* [TW] OR weight-bearing [MH] OR Range of motion 
[MH] OR T reatment Outcome [MH] OR Exercise [MH] OR physi -
cal therapy treatment* [TW] OR training program* [TW])
Scopus
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patellofemoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-
femoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“anterior knee pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral 
disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“runner’s knee”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (PFPS) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) OR 
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (arthralg*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (pain*)) AND 
(TITLE-ABS-KEY (patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (femoropatell*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“femoro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (retro -
patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“retro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“lateral facet*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“lateral compr*”) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (“lateral press*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“odd facet*”)) 
AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY (syndrom*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (dysfunct*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (disorder*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondromal*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondropath*)))) AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(classif*))
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patellofemoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-
femoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“anterior knee pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral 
disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“runner’s knee”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (PFPS) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) OR 
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (arthralg*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (pain*)) AND 
(TITLE-ABS-KEY (patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (femoropatell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“femoro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (retro -
patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“retro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“lateral facet*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“lateral compr*”) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (“lateral press*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“odd facet*”)) 
AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY (syndrom*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (dysfunct*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (disorder*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondromal*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondropath*)))) AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY (as -
sociat*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (risk*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (probabil*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (odds*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (relat*) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (prevalen*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (predict*) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (caus*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (etiol* ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(interact*))
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patellofemoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-
femoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“anterior knee pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral 
disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“runner’s knee”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (PFPS) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) OR 
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (arthralg*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (pain*)) AND 
(TITLE-ABS-KEY (patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (femoropatell*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“femoro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (retro -
patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“retro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“lateral facet*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“lateral compr*”) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (“lateral press*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“odd facet*”)) 
AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY (syndrom*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (dysfunct*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (disorder*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondromal*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondropath*)))) AND ((TITLE (preval*) 
OR KEY (preval*)) OR (TITLE (inciden*) OR KEY (inciden*)) OR 
(TITLE (epidemiolog*) OR KEY (epidemiolog*)))
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patellofemoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-
femoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“anterior knee pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral 
disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“runner’s knee”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (PFPS) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) OR 
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (arthralg*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (pain*)) AND 
(TITLE-ABS-KEY (patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (femoropatell*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“femoro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (retro -
patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“retro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“lateral facet*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“lateral compr*”) OR TITLE-
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg60   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
ABS-KEY (“lateral press*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“odd facet*”)) 
AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY (syndrom*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (dysfunct*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (disorder*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondromal*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondropath*)))) AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(sensitiv*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (specificity) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(diagnos*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“disability evaluation”) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (questionnaire) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (questionnaires) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (instrument) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (instruments) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (scale) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (scales) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (measurement) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (measurements) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (index) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (indices) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (score) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (scores))
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patellofemoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-
femoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“anterior knee pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral 
disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“runner’s knee”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (PFPS) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) OR 
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (arthralg*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (pain*)) AND 
(TITLE-ABS-KEY (patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (femoropatell*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“femoro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (retro -
patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“retro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“lateral facet*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“lateral compr*”) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (“lateral press*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“odd facet*”)) 
AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY (syndrom*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (dysfunct*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (disorder*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondromal*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondropath*)))) AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(prognos*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“return to work”) OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY (“return to sport”))
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patellofemoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-
femoral pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“anterior knee pain*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“patello-femoral 
disorder*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“runner’s knee”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (PFPS) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) OR 
((TITLE-ABS-KEY (arthralg*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (pain*)) AND 
(TITLE-ABS-KEY (patell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (femoropatell*) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“femoro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (ret -
ropatell*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“retro-patell*”) OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY (“lateral facet*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“lateral compr*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“lateral press*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“odd 
facet*”)) AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY (syndrom*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(dysfunct*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (disorder*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(chondromal*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (chondropath*)))) AND 
(TITLE-ABS-KEY (“physical therapy modalit*”) OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY (“recovery of function”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (rehab*) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (therapeutic*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“physical 
therap*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (physiother*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(recover*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (restor*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“re-
education*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“early ambulation”) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (strengthen*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“resistance training”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“resistance method*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“exercise therap*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (stretch*) OR TITLE-ABS-
KEY (biofeedback) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“neuromuscular electri -
cal stimulation*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“pain management”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“pain measurement*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(mobiliz*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“muscle stretching exercise*”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“spinal manipulation*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(ultrasonograph*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (ultrasound*) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (acupunctur*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (laser*) OR TITLE-
ABS-KEY (“patient education*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“electrical 
stimulation”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“electrical stimulation ther -
ap*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“T ranscutaneous electric nerve stimu -
lation”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (tap*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (brac*) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (orthotic*) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“weight-bearing”) 
OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Range of motion”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY 
(“T reatment Outcome*”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (Exercise*) OR 
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“training program*”))
CINAHL
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg61
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI (clas -
sif*) OR SU (classif*) OR AB (classif*)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI (syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI (asso -
ciat*) OR AB (associat*) OR SU (associat*)) OR (TI (risk*) OR AB 
(risk*) OR SU (risk*)) OR (SU (probabil*) OR TI (probabil*) OR 
AB (probabil*)) OR (TI (odds*) OR AB (odds*) OR SU (odds*)) 
OR (TI (relat*) OR AB (relat*) OR SU (relat*)) OR (SU (prevalen*) 
OR TI (prevalen*) OR AB (prevalen*)) OR (TI (predict*) OR AB 
(predict*) OR SU (predict*)) OR (TI (caus*) OR AB (caus*) OR 
SU (caus*)) OR (TI (etiol*) OR AB (etiol*) OR SU (etiol*)) OR (TI 
(interact*) OR AB (interact*) OR SU (interact*)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI (pre -
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg62   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
val*) OR SU (preval*) OR AB (preval*)) OR (TI (inciden*) OR SU 
(inciden*) OR AB (inciden*)) OR (TI (epidemiolog*) OR SU (epi -
demiolog*) OR AB (epidemiolog*)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI (sen -
sitiv*) OR AB (sensitiv*) OR SU (sensitiv*)) OR (TI (specificity) 
OR AB (specificity) OR SU (specificity)) OR (TI (diagnos*) OR 
AB (diagnos*) OR SU (diagnos*)) OR (SU (questionnaire) OR TI 
(questionnaire) OR AB (questionnaire)) OR (SU (questionnaires) 
OR TI (questionnaires) OR AB (questionnaires)) OR (SU (“disabil -
ity evaluation”) OR TI (“disability evaluation”) OR AB (“disability 
evaluation”)) OR (TI (instrument) OR AB (instrument) OR SU (in -
strument)) OR (TI (instruments) OR AB (instruments) OR SU (in -
struments)) OR (SU (scale) OR TI (scale) OR AB (scale)) OR (SU 
(scales) OR TI (scales) OR AB (scales)) OR (TI (measurement) OR AB (measurement) OR SU (measurement)) OR (TI (measure -
ments) OR AB (measurements) OR SU (measurements)) OR (TI 
(index) OR AB (index) OR SU (index)) OR (TI (indices) OR AB 
(indices) OR SU (indices)) OR (TI (score) OR AB (score) OR SU 
(score))OR (TI (scores) OR AB (scores) OR SU (scores)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((SU 
(prognos*) OR TI (prognos*) OR AB (prognos*)) OR (TI (return 
to work) OR AB (return to work) OR SU (return to work)) OR (SU 
(return to sport) OR TI (return to sport) OR AB (return to sport)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg63
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI 
(physical therapy modalit*) OR AB (physical therapy modalit*) 
OR SU (physical therapy modalit*)) OR (TI (recovery of function) 
OR AB (recovery of function) OR SU (recovery of function)) OR 
(SU (rehab*) OR TI (rehab*) OR AB (rehab*)) OR (SU (therapeu -
tic*) OR TI (therapeutic*) OR AB (therapeutic*)) OR (SU (physi -
cal therap*) OR TI (physical therap*) OR AB (physical therap*)) 
OR (TI (physiother*) OR AB (physiother*) OR SU (physiother*)) 
OR (SU (recover*) OR TI (recover*) OR AB (recover*)) OR (TI 
(restor*) OR AB (restor*) OR SU (restor*)) OR (TI (re-education*) 
OR AB (re-education*) OR SU (re-education*)) OR (SU (early 
ambulation) OR TI (early ambulation) OR AB (early ambulation)) 
OR (TI (strengthen*) OR AB (strengthen*) OR SU (strengthen*)) 
OR (SU (resistance training) OR TI (resistance training) OR AB 
(resistance training)) OR (TI (resistance method*) OR AB (resis -
tance method*) OR SU (resistance method*)) OR (SU (exercise 
therap*) OR TI (exercise therap*) OR AB (exercise therap*)) OR 
(SU (stretch*) OR TI (stretch*) OR AB (stretch*)) OR (SU (bio -feedback) OR TI (biofeedback) OR AB (biofeedback)) OR (SU 
(neuromuscular electrical stimulation*) OR TI (neuromuscular 
electrical stimulation*) OR AB (neuromuscular electrical stimula -
tion*)) OR (TI (pain management) OR AB (pain management) 
OR SU (pain management)) OR (SU (pain measurement*) OR 
TI (pain measurement*) OR AB (pain measurement*)) OR (TI 
(mobiliz*) OR AB (mobiliz*) OR SU (mobiliz*)) OR (TI (muscle 
stretching exercise*) OR AB (muscle stretching exercise*) OR 
SU (muscle stretching exercise*)) OR (TI (spinal manipulation*) 
OR AB (spinal manipulation*) OR SU (spinal manipulation*)) OR 
(SU (ultrasonograph*) OR TI (ultrasonograph*) OR AB (ultra -
sonograph*)) OR (TI (ultrasound*) OR AB (ultrasound*) OR SU 
(ultrasound*)) OR (SU (acupunctur*) OR TI (acupunctur*) OR AB 
(acupunctur*)) OR (SU (laser*) OR TI (laser*) OR AB (laser*)) 
OR (SU (patient education*) OR TI (patient education*) OR AB 
(patient education*)) OR (SU (electrical stimulation) OR TI (elec -
trical stimulation) OR AB (electrical stimulation)) OR (TI (electri -
cal stimulation therap*) OR AB (electrical stimulation therap*) 
OR SU (electrical stimulation therap*)) OR (SU (T ranscutaneous 
electric nerve stimulation) OR TI (T ranscutaneous electric nerve 
stimulation) OR AB (T ranscutaneous electric nerve stimulation)) 
OR (SU (tap*) OR TI (tap*) OR AB (tap*)) OR (TI (brac*) OR AB 
(brac*) OR SU (brac*)) OR (SU (orthotic*) OR TI (orthotic*) OR 
AB (orthotic*)) OR (SU (weight-bearing) OR TI (weight-bearing) 
OR AB (weight-bearing)) OR (SU (Range of Motion) OR TI 
(Range of motion) OR AB (Range of motion)) OR (SU (treatment 
outcome*) OR TI (treatment outcome*) OR AB (treatment out -
come*)) OR (SU (exercise*) OR TI (exercise*) OR AB (exercise*)) 
OR (SU (training program*) OR TI (training program*) OR AB 
(training program*)))
SPORTDiscus
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg64   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI (clas -
sif*) OR SU (classif*) OR AB (classif*)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI (asso -
ciat*) OR AB (associat*) OR SU (associat*)) OR (TI (risk*) OR AB 
(risk*) OR SU (risk*)) OR (SU (probabil*) OR TI (probabil*) OR 
AB (probabil*)) OR (TI (odds*) OR AB (odds*) OR SU (odds*)) 
OR (TI (relat*) OR AB (relat*) OR SU (relat*)) OR (SU (prevalen*) 
OR TI (prevalen*) OR AB (prevalen*)) OR (TI (predict*) OR AB 
(predict*) OR SU (predict*)) OR (TI (caus*) OR AB (caus*) OR 
SU (caus*)) OR (TI (etiol*) OR AB (etiol*) OR SU (etiol*)) OR (TI 
(interact*) OR AB (interact*) OR SU (interact*)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg65
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI (pre -
val*) OR SU (preval*) OR AB (preval*)) OR (TI (inciden*) OR SU 
(inciden*) OR AB (inciden*)) OR (TI (epidemiolog*) OR SU (epi -
demiolog*) OR AB (epidemiolog*)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI (sen -
sitiv*) OR AB (sensitiv*) OR SU (sensitiv*)) OR (TI (specificity) 
OR AB (specificity) OR SU (specificity)) OR (TI (diagnos*) OR 
AB (diagnos*) OR SU (diagnos*)) OR (SU (questionnaire) OR TI 
(questionnaire) OR AB (questionnaire)) OR (SU (questionnaires) 
OR TI (questionnaires) OR AB (questionnaires)) OR (SU (“disabil -
ity evaluation”) OR TI (“disability evaluation”) OR AB (“disability 
evaluation”)) OR (TI (instrument) OR AB (instrument) OR SU (in -
strument)) OR (TI (instruments) OR AB (instruments) OR SU (in -struments)) OR (SU (scale) OR TI (scale) OR AB (scale)) OR (SU 
(scales) OR TI (scales) OR AB (scales)) OR (TI (measurement) 
OR AB (measurement) OR SU (measurement)) OR (TI (measure -
ments) OR AB (measurements) OR SU (measurements)) OR (TI 
(index) OR AB (index) OR SU (index)) OR (TI (indices) OR AB 
(indices) OR SU (indices)) OR (TI (score) OR AB (score) OR SU 
(score))OR (TI (scores) OR AB (scores) OR SU (scores)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((SU 
(prognos*) OR TI (prognos*) OR AB (prognos*)) OR (TI (return 
to work) OR AB (return to work) OR SU (return to work)) OR (SU 
(return to sport) OR TI (return to sport) OR AB (return to sport)))
(((SU (patellofemoral pain*) OR TI (patellofemoral pain*) OR AB 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg66   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
(patellofemoral pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral syndrom*) OR TI 
(patellofemoral syndrom*) OR AB (patellofemoral syndrom*)) 
OR (SU (patello-femoral pain*) OR TI (patello-femoral pain*) 
OR AB (patello-femoral pain*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral syn -
drom*) OR TI (patello-femoral syndrom*) OR AB (patello-femoral 
syndrom*)) OR (SU (anterior knee pain*) OR TI (anterior knee 
pain*) OR AB (anterior knee pain*)) OR (SU (patellofemoral dis -
order*) OR TI (patellofemoral disorder*) OR AB (patellofemoral 
disorder*)) OR (SU (patello-femoral disorder*) OR TI (patello-
femoral disorder*) OR AB (patello-femoral disorder*)) OR (TI 
(chondromalacia patellae) OR SU (chondromalacia patellae) OR 
AB (chondromalacia patellae)) OR (TI (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
disease*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*) OR AB 
(Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*)) OR (SU (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*) 
OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson disease*)) OR (TI (Sinding-
Larsen-Johansson syndrom*) OR SU (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson 
syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrom*)) OR 
(SU (Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*) OR TI (Sinding Larsen 
Johansson syndrom*) OR AB (Sinding Larsen Johansson syn -
drom*)) OR (SU (runner’s knee) OR TI (runner’s knee) OR AB 
(runner’s knee)) OR (SU (PFPS) OR TI (PFPS) OR AB (PFPS)) OR 
(SU (extensor mechanism disorder*) OR TI (extensor mechanism 
disorder*) OR AB (extensor mechanism disorder*))) OR (((SU 
(arthralg*) OR TI (arthralg*) OR AB (arthralg*)) OR (TI (pain*) 
OR SU (pain*) OR AB (pain*))) AND ((TI (patell*) OR SU (patell*) 
OR AB (patell*)) OR (TI (femoropatell*) OR SU (femoropatell*) 
OR AB (femoropatell*)) OR (TI (femoro-patell*) OR SU (femoro-
patell*) OR AB (femoro-patell*)) OR (TI (retropatell*) OR SU 
(retropatell*) OR AB (retropatell*)) OR (TI (retro-patell*) OR SU 
(retro-patell*) OR AB (retro-patell*)) OR (TI (lateral facet*) OR 
SU (lateral facet*) OR AB (lateral facet*)) OR (TI (lateral compr*) 
OR SU (lateral compr*) OR AB (lateral compr*)) OR (TI (lateral 
press*) OR SU (lateral press*) OR AB (lateral press*)) OR (TI 
(odd facet*) OR SU (odd facet*) OR AB (odd facet*))) AND ((TI 
(syndrom*) OR SU (syndrom*) OR AB (syndrom*)) OR (TI (dys -
funct*) OR SU (dysfunct*) OR AB (dysfunct*)) OR (TI (disorder*) 
OR SU (disorder*) OR AB (disorder*)) OR (TI (chondromal*) OR 
SU (chondromal*) OR AB (chondromal*)) OR (TI (chondropath*) 
OR SU (chondropath*) OR AB (chondropath*))))) AND ((TI 
(physical therapy modalit*) OR AB (physical therapy modalit*) 
OR SU (physical therapy modalit*)) OR (TI (recovery of function) 
OR AB (recovery of function) OR SU (recovery of function)) OR 
(SU (rehab*) OR TI (rehab*) OR AB (rehab*)) OR (SU (therapeu -
tic*) OR TI (therapeutic*) OR AB (therapeutic*)) OR (SU (physi -
cal therap*) OR TI (physical therap*) OR AB (physical therap*)) 
OR (TI (physiother*) OR AB (physiother*) OR SU (physiother*)) 
OR (SU (recover*) OR TI (recover*) OR AB (recover*)) OR (TI 
(restor*) OR AB (restor*) OR SU (restor*)) OR (TI (re-education*) 
OR AB (re-education*) OR SU (re-education*)) OR (SU (early 
ambulation) OR TI (early ambulation) OR AB (early ambulation)) 
OR (TI (strengthen*) OR AB (strengthen*) OR SU (strengthen*)) 
OR (SU (resistance training) OR TI (resistance training) OR AB 
(resistance training)) OR (TI (resistance method*) OR AB (resis -
tance method*) OR SU (resistance method*)) OR (SU (exercise therap*) OR TI (exercise therap*) OR AB (exercise therap*)) OR 
(SU (stretch*) OR TI (stretch*) OR AB (stretch*)) OR (SU (bio -
feedback) OR TI (biofeedback) OR AB (biofeedback)) OR (SU 
(neuromuscular electrical stimulation*) OR TI (neuromuscular 
electrical stimulation*) OR AB (neuromuscular electrical stimula -
tion*)) OR (TI (pain management) OR AB (pain management) 
OR SU (pain management)) OR (SU (pain measurement*) OR 
TI (pain measurement*) OR AB (pain measurement*)) OR (TI 
(mobiliz*) OR AB (mobiliz*) OR SU (mobiliz*)) OR (TI (muscle 
stretching exercise*) OR AB (muscle stretching exercise*) OR 
SU (muscle stretching exercise*)) OR (TI (spinal manipulation*) 
OR AB (spinal manipulation*) OR SU (spinal manipulation*)) OR 
(SU (ultrasonograph*) OR TI (ultrasonograph*) OR AB (ultra -
sonograph*)) OR (TI (ultrasound*) OR AB (ultrasound*) OR SU 
(ultrasound*)) OR (SU (acupunctur*) OR TI (acupunctur*) OR AB 
(acupunctur*)) OR (SU (laser*) OR TI (laser*) OR AB (laser*)) 
OR (SU (patient education*) OR TI (patient education*) OR AB 
(patient education*)) OR (SU (electrical stimulation) OR TI (elec -
trical stimulation) OR AB (electrical stimulation)) OR (TI (electri -
cal stimulation therap*) OR AB (electrical stimulation therap*) 
OR SU (electrical stimulation therap*)) OR (SU (T ranscutaneous 
electric nerve stimulation) OR TI (T ranscutaneous electric nerve 
stimulation) OR AB (T ranscutaneous electric nerve stimulation)) 
OR (SU (tap*) OR TI (tap*) OR AB (tap*)) OR (TI (brac*) OR AB 
(brac*) OR SU (brac*)) OR (SU (orthotic*) OR TI (orthotic*) OR 
AB (orthotic*)) OR (SU (weight-bearing) OR TI (weight-bearing) 
OR AB (weight-bearing)) OR (SU (Range of Motion) OR TI 
(Range of motion) OR AB (Range of motion)) OR (SU (treatment 
outcome*) OR TI (treatment outcome*) OR AB (treatment out -
come*)) OR (SU (exercise*) OR TI (exercise*) OR AB (exercise*)) 
OR (SU (training program*) OR TI (training program*) OR AB 
(training program*)))
Cochrane Library
(((“patellofemoral pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral pain*”) OR (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“anterior knee pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral disorder*”) OR (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syn -
drom*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR (“run -
ner’s knee”) OR (PFPS) OR (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) 
OR (((arthralg*) OR (pain*)) AND ((patell*) OR (femoropatell*) 
OR (“femoro-patell*”) OR (retropatell*) OR (“retro-patell*”) OR 
(“lateral facet*”) OR (“lateral compr*”) OR (“lateral press*”) OR 
(“odd facet*”)) AND ((syndrom*) OR (dysfunct*) OR (disorder*) 
OR (chondromal*) OR (chondropath*)))) AND (classif*)
(((“patellofemoral pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral pain*”) OR (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“anterior knee pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral disorder*”) OR (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg67
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX A
Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syn -
drom*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR (“run -
ner’s knee”) OR (PFPS) OR (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) 
OR (((arthralg*) OR (pain*)) AND ((patell*) OR (femoropatell*) 
OR (“femoro-patell*”) OR (retropatell*) OR (“retro-patell*”) OR 
(“lateral facet*”) OR (“lateral compr*”) OR (“lateral press*”) OR 
(“odd facet*”)) AND ((syndrom*) OR (dysfunct*) OR (disorder*) 
OR (chondromal*) OR (chondropath*)))) AND ((associat*) OR 
(risk*) OR (probabil*) OR (odds*) OR (relat*) OR (prevalen*) OR 
(predict*) OR (caus*) OR (etiol*) OR (interact*))
(((“patellofemoral pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral pain*”) OR (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“anterior knee pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral disorder*”) OR (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syn -
drom*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR (“run -
ner’s knee”) OR (PFPS) OR (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) 
OR (((arthralg*) OR (pain*)) AND ((patell*) OR (femoropatell*) 
OR (“femoro-patell*”) OR (retropatell*) OR (“retro-patell*”) OR 
(“lateral facet*”) OR (“lateral compr*”) OR (“lateral press*”) OR 
(“odd facet*”)) AND ((syndrom*) OR (dysfunct*) OR (disorder*) 
OR (chondromal*) OR (chondropath*)))) AND ((preval*) OR (inci -
den*) OR (epidemiolog*))
(((“patellofemoral pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral pain*”) OR (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“anterior knee pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral disorder*”) OR (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syn -
drom*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR (“run -
ner’s knee”) OR (PFPS) OR (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) 
OR (((arthralg*) OR (pain*)) AND ((patell*) OR (femoropatell*) 
OR (“femoro-patell*”) OR (retropatell*) OR (“retro-patell*”) OR 
(“lateral facet*”) OR (“lateral compr*”) OR (“lateral press*”) OR 
(“odd facet*”)) AND ((syndrom*) OR (dysfunct*) OR (disorder*) 
OR (chondromal*) OR (chondropath*)))) AND ((sensitiv*) OR 
(specificity) OR (diagnos*) OR (“disability evaluation”) OR (ques -
tionnaire) OR (questionnaires) OR (instrument) OR (instruments) 
OR (scale) OR (scales) OR (measurement) OR (measurements) 
OR (index) OR (indices) OR (score) OR (scores))(((“patellofemoral pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral pain*”) OR (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“anterior knee pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral disorder*”) OR (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syn -
drom*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR (“run -
ner’s knee”) OR (PFPS) OR (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) 
OR (((arthralg*) OR (pain*)) AND ((patell*) OR (femoropatell*) 
OR (“femoro-patell*”) OR (retropatell*) OR (“retro-patell*”) OR 
(“lateral facet*”) OR (“lateral compr*”) OR (“lateral press*”) OR 
(“odd facet*”)) AND ((syndrom*) OR (dysfunct*) OR (disorder*) 
OR (chondromal*) OR (chondropath*)))) AND ((prognos*) OR 
(“return to work”) OR (“return to sport”))
(((“patellofemoral pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral pain*”) OR (“patello-femoral syndrom*”) OR 
(“anterior knee pain*”) OR (“patellofemoral disorder*”) OR 
(“patello-femoral disorder*”) OR (“chondromalacia patellae”) 
OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen 
Johansson disease*”) OR (“Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syn -
drom*”) OR (“Sinding Larsen Johansson syndrom*”) OR (“run -
ner’s knee”) OR (PFPS) OR (“extensor mechanism disorder*”)) 
OR (((arthralg*) OR (pain*)) AND ((patell*) OR (femoropatell*) 
OR (“femoro-patell*”) OR (retropatell*) OR (“retro-patell*”) OR 
(“lateral facet*”) OR (“lateral compr*”) OR (“lateral press*”) OR 
(“odd facet*”)) AND ((syndrom*) OR (dysfunct*) OR (disorder*) 
OR (chondromal*) OR (chondropath*)))) AND ((“physical therapy 
modalit*”) OR (“recovery of function”) OR (rehab*) OR (thera -
peutic*) OR (“physical therap*”) OR (physiother*) OR (recover*) 
OR (restor*) OR (“re-education*”) OR (“early ambulation”) OR 
(strengthen*) OR (“resistance training”) OR (“resistance meth -
od*”) OR (“exercise therap*”) OR (stretch*) OR (biofeedback) 
OR (“neuromuscular electrical stimulation*”) OR (“pain manage -
ment”) OR (“pain measurement*”) OR (mobiliz*) OR (“muscle 
stretching exercise*”) OR (“spinal manipulation*”) OR (ultraso -
nograph*) OR (ultrasound*) OR (acupunctur*) OR (laser*) OR 
(“patient education*”) OR (“electrical stimulation”) OR (“electri -
cal stimulation therap*”) OR (“T ranscutaneous electric nerve 
stimulation”) OR (tap*) OR (brac*) OR (orthotic*) OR (“weight-
bearing”) OR (“range of motion”) OR (“treatment outcome*”) OR 
(exercise*) OR (“training program*”))
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg68   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX B
SEARCH RESUL TS
Database Date Conducted Results, n
MEDLINE/PubMed May 2018 4604
Scopus May 2018 8814
CINAHL May 2018 2656
SPORTDiscus May 2018 2730
Cochrane Library May 2018 1230
Cochrane reviews 38
Other reviews 28
T rials 1161
T echnology assessments 1
Economic evaluations 2
To t a l 20034
T otal with duplicates removed 4691
T otal with hand search 12
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg69
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX C
CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION OF 
STUDIES FOR REVIEW
Criteria for Considering Studies for Review
Inclusions: articles published in peer-reviewed journals that 
include studies of the following types: systematic reviews, meta-
analyses, experimental and quasi-experimental, cohort, case 
series, and cross-sectional studies.
Inclusion Criteria
Articles reporting on
• The functional anatomy of the patellofemoral joint
OR
• T ests and measures for diagnosis and/ or differential diagnosis 
of patellofemoral pain within the scope of physical therapist 
practice, including but not limited to “specific tests and 
measures”
OR
• Measurement properties of instruments and tests specific to 
measuring patellofemoral pain, or patellofemoral pain–related 
outcomes (including but not limited to symptoms, functions, 
activity, and participation)
OR
• Measurement properties of instruments that are specific to 
patellofemoral pain or lower extremity outcomes tested in pa -
tients with patellofemoral pain
OR
• Measurement properties of instruments using data from a 
sample of patients with patellofemoral pain
OR
• Primarily adolescents (12 years of age or older) and adults with 
patellofemoral pain
- Studies reporting on persons younger than 12 years of age 
IF the proportion in the sample is small (less than 5%) OR 
separate data are available for adults
AND
Patellofemoral pain, including the following topics:
• Risk of patellofemoral pain, including but not limited to range of 
motion and body mass
• Diagnostic characteristics of patellofemoral pain, including but 
not limited to pain location, duration, and quality and related impairments and functional limitations
• Interventions within the scope of practice of physical thera -
pists, including but not limited to manual therapy, stretching 
exercises, taping, orthotic devices, splints, neuromuscular re-
education, muscle strengthening, modalities, etc)
All outcomes were included.
Exclusion Criteria
Exclusions: meeting abstracts/ conference proceedings, press 
releases, theses, letters to the editor, authors’ responses, nonsys -
tematic review articles, case reports, and articles that cannot be 
retrieved in English.
Articles reporting on
• Primarily infants and children (younger than 12 years of age)
• Pain related primarily to conditions such as
- Patellar tendinopathy/tendon pain
- Iliotibial band syndrome
- Patellofemoral instability/ subluxation/ dislocation
- Knee and/ or patellofemoral osteoarthritis
- Osteochondritis dissecans
- Knee plica/fat-pad syndrome (Hoffa’s syndrome)
- Bipartite patella
- Fractures (including stress fractures)
- Compartment syndrome
- T umors
- Postoperative patellofemoral pain, patellar tendinopathy/
tendon pain, or iliotibial band pain from knee surgery or 
arthroplasty
• Anterior cruciate ligament surgery, reconstruction
• T otal knee arthroplasty
• Lateral release of patella
• Proximal and/ or distal realignment of patella
- Pain secondary to systemic conditions or nerve compression
• Diabetes
• Ulcers
• Primary peripheral nerve entrapment
• T opics outside the scope of physical therapist practice
- Decisions to order radiologic tests (magnetic resonance  
imaging, etc)
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg70   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesFLOW CHART OF ARTICLESAPPENDIX D
Records identiﬁed through 
database search, n = 20 034
Records screened (title and 
abstract), n = 4691Duplicates removed, n = 15 343
Full-text articles assessed for 
eligibility, n = 1001Records excluded, n = 3702 Hand search, n = 12
Relevant articles appraised, 
n = 313Full-text articles excluded, 
n = 688
• Methodology, n = 650
• Outside scope, n = 38
Studies included in recommen-
dations, n = 271
• Diagnosis/Classiﬁcation, 
n = 120
• Examination, n = 56
• Interventions, n = 95Appraised articles excluded, 
n = 42Included Eligibility Screening Identiﬁcation
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg71
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesARTICLES INCLUDED IN RECOMMENDATIONS, BY TOPIC
Impairment/Function-Based Diagnosis
Prevalence/Incidence
Boling M, Padua D, Marshall S, Guskiewicz K, Pyne S, Beutler A. Gen -
der differences in the incidence and prevalence of patellofemoral 
pain syndrome. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 2010;20:725-730. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.2009.00996.x
Callaghan MJ, Selfe J. Has the incidence or prevalence of patello -
femoral pain in the general population in the United Kingdom been 
properly evaluated? Phys Ther Sport . 2007;8:37-43. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.ptsp.2006.07 .001
Glaviano NR, Baellow A, Saliba S. Physical activity levels in individuals 
with and without patellofemoral pain. Phys Ther Sport . 2017;27:12-16. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.ptsp.2017 .07 .002
Jordaan G, Schwellnus MP . The incidence of overuse injuries in military 
recruits during basic military training. Mil Med . 1994;159:421-426. 
https:// doi.org/10.1093/ milmed/159.6.421
Lakstein D, Fridman T , Ziv YB, Kosashvili Y . Prevalence of anterior 
knee pain and pes planus in Israel Defense Force recruits. Mil Med . 
2010;175:855-857 . https:// doi.org/10.7205/ milmed-d-09-00145
Lankhorst NE, van Middelkoop M, Crossley KM, et al. Factors that 
predict a poor outcome 5–8 years after the diagnosis of patello -
femoral pain: a multicentre observational analysis. Br J Sports Med . 
2016;50:881-886. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2015-094664
Myer GD, Ford KR, Barber Foss KD, et al. The incidence and potential 
pathomechanics of patellofemoral pain in female athletes. Clin 
Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 2010;25:700-707 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
clinbiomech.2010.04.001
Neal BS, Griffiths IB, Dowling GJ, et al. Foot posture as a risk fac -
tor for lower limb overuse injury: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Foot Ankle Res . 2014;7:55. https:// doi.org/10.1186/
s13047-014-0055-4
Oakes JL, McCandless P , Selfe J. Exploration of the current evidence 
base for the incidence and prevalence of patellofemoral pain syn -
drome. Phys Ther Rev . 2009;14:382-387 . https:// doi.org/10.1179/108
331909X12488667117177
Patel DR, Nelson TL. Sports injuries in adolescents. Med Clin 
North Am . 2000;84:983-1007 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/
S0025-7125(05)70270-4
Rathleff CR, Olesen JL, Roos EM, Rasmussen S, Rathleff MS. Half of 
12-15-year-olds with knee pain still have pain after one year. Dan Med 
J. 2013;60:A4725.
Rathleff MS, Rathleff CR, Olesen JL, Rasmussen S, Roos EM. Is knee 
pain during adolescence a self-limiting condition? Prognosis of 
patellofemoral pain and other types of knee pain. Am J Sports Med . 
2016;44:1165-1171. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546515622456
Sandow MJ, Goodfellow JW. The natural history of anterior knee pain in 
adolescents. J Bone Joint Surg Br . 1985;67:36-38.Smith BE, Moffatt F , Hendrick P , et al. The experience of living with 
patellofemoral pain—loss, confusion and fear-avoidance: a UK quali -
tative study. BMJ Open . 2018;8:e018624. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2017-018624
Stathopulu E, Baildam E. Anterior knee pain: a long-term follow-up. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) . 2003;42:380-382. https:// doi.org/10.1093/
rheumatology/keg093
T enforde AS, Sayres LC, McCurdy ML, Collado H, Sainani KL, Frederic -
son M. Overuse injuries in high school runners: lifetime prevalence 
and prevention strategies. PM R . 2011;3:125-131; quiz 131. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pmrj.2010.09.009
Witvrouw E, Callaghan MJ, Stefanik JJ, et al. Patellofemoral pain: con -
sensus statement from the 3rd International Patellofemoral Pain Re -
search Retreat held in Vancouver, September 2013. Br J Sports Med . 
2014;48:411-414. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093450
Clinical Course
Blond L, Hansen L. Patellofemoral pain syndrome in athletes: a 5.7-year 
retrospective follow-up study of 250 athletes. Acta Orthop Belg . 
1998;64:393-400.
Boling MC, Padua DA, Marshall SW, Guskiewicz K, Pyne S, Beutler 
A. A prospective investigation of biomechanical risk factors for 
patellofemoral pain syndrome: the Joint Undertaking to Monitor 
and Prevent ACL Injury (JUMP-ACL) cohort. Am J Sports Med . 
2009;37:2108-2116. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546509337934
Collins NJ, Vicenzino B, van der Heijden RA, van Middelkoop M. Pain 
during prolonged sitting is a common problem in persons with 
patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2016;46:658-663. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6470
Conchie H, Clark D, Metcalfe A, Eldridge J, Whitehouse M. Adolescent 
knee pain and patellar dislocations are associated with patel -
lofemoral osteoarthritis in adulthood: a case control study. Knee . 
2016;23:708-711. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2016.04.009
Cook CE. Orthopedic Manual Therapy: An Evidence-Based Approach . 
2nd ed. Boston, MA: Pearson; 2011.
Crossley KM. Is patellofemoral osteoarthritis a common sequela of 
patellofemoral pain? Br J Sports Med . 2014;48:409-410. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093445
Crossley KM, Cowan SM, Bennell KL, McConnell J. Knee flexion dur -
ing stair ambulation is altered in individuals with patellofemoral 
pain. J Orthop Res . 2004;22:267-274. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
orthres.2003.08.014
Crossley KM, Stefanik JJ, Selfe J, et al. 2016 patellofemoral pain con -
sensus statement from the 4th International Patellofemoral Pain 
Research Retreat, Manchester. Part 1: terminology, definitions, clini -
cal examination, natural history, patellofemoral osteoarthritis and 
patient-reported outcome measures. Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:839-
843. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096384
de Oliveira Silva D, Briani RV , Pazzinatto MF , Ferrari D, Aragão FA, de 
Azevedo FM. Reduced knee flexion is a possible cause of increased 
loading rates in individuals with patellofemoral pain. Clin Bio -
mech (Bristol, Avon) . 2015;30:971-975. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
clinbiomech.2015.06.021APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg72   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesDierks T A, Manal KT , Hamill J, Davis I. Lower extremity kinemat -
ics in runners with patellofemoral pain during a prolonged run. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2011;43:693-700. https:// doi.org/10.1249/
MSS.0b013e3181f744f5
Gerbino PG, 2nd, Griffin ED, d’Hemecourt PA, et al. Patellofemo -
ral pain syndrome: evaluation of location and intensity of pain. 
Clin J Pain . 2006;22:154-159. https:// doi.org/10.1097 /01.
ajp.0000159583.31912.1d
Giles LS, Webster KE, McClelland JA, Cook J. Does quadriceps atrophy 
exist in individuals with patellofemoral pain? A systematic literature 
review with meta-analysis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2013;43:766-
776. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.4833
Herrington L. Knee valgus angle during single leg squat and landing 
in patellofemoral pain patients and controls. Knee . 2014;21:514-517 . 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2013.11.011
Hinman RS, Lentzos J, Vicenzino B, Crossley KM. Is patellofemoral 
osteoarthritis common in middle-aged people with chronic patel -
lofemoral pain? Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) . 2014;66:1252-1257 . 
https:// doi.org/10.1002/ acr.22274
Hoglund LT , Hillstrom HJ, Barr-Gillespie AE, Lockard MA, Barbe MF , 
Song J. Frontal plane knee and hip kinematics during sit-to-stand 
and proximal lower extremity strength in persons with patellofemoral 
osteoarthritis: a pilot study. J Appl Biomech . 2014;30:82-94. https://
doi.org/10.1123/jab.2012-0244
Hoglund LT , Lockard MA, Barbe MF , et al. Physical performance 
measurement in persons with patellofemoral osteoarthritis: a pilot 
study. J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil . 2015;28:335-342. https:// doi.
org/10.3233/BMR-140525
Holden S, Boreham C, Doherty C, Delahunt E. T wo-dimensional knee 
valgus displacement as a predictor of patellofemoral pain in adoles -
cent females. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 2017;27:188-194. https:// doi.
org/10.1111/ sms.12633
Kannus P , Natri A, Niittymäki S, Järvinen M. Effect of intraarticular 
glycosaminoglycan polysulfate treatment on patellofemoral pain 
syndrome. A prospective, randomized double-blind trial compar -
ing glycosaminoglycan polysulfate with placebo and quadriceps 
muscle exercises. Arthritis Rheum . 1992;35:1053-1061. https:// doi.
org/10.1002/ art.1780350910
Kannus P , Natri A, Paakkala T , Järvinen M. An outcome study of chronic 
patellofemoral pain syndrome. Seven-year follow-up of patients in 
a randomized, controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am . 1999;81:355-
363. https:// doi.org/10.2106/00004623-199903000-00007
Kannus P , Niittymäki S. Which factors predict outcome in the nonop -
erative treatment of patellofemoral pain syndrome? A prospective 
follow-up study. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 1994;26:289-296. https:// doi.
org/10.1249/00005768-199403000-00004
Lankhorst NE, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, van Middelkoop M. Risk factors for 
patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther . 2012;42:81-94. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2012.3803
Lankhorst NE, van Middelkoop M, Crossley KM, et al. Factors that 
predict a poor outcome 5–8 years after the diagnosis of patello -
femoral pain: a multicentre observational analysis. Br J Sports Med . 
2016;50:881-886. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2015-094664Meira EP , Brumitt J. Influence of the hip on patients with patellofemoral 
pain syndrome: a systematic review. Sports Health . 2011;3:455-465. 
https:// doi.org/10.1177 /1941738111415006
Nimon G, Murray D, Sandow M, Goodfellow J. Natural history of ante -
rior knee pain: a 14- to 20-year follow-up of nonoperative manage -
ment. J Pediatr Orthop . 1998;18:118-122.
Nunes GS, Barton CJ, Serrão FV . Hip rate of force development and 
strength are impaired in females with patellofemoral pain without 
signs of altered gluteus medius and maximus morphology. J Sci Med 
Sport . 2018;21:123-128. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2017 .05.014
Papadopoulos K, Stasinopoulos D, Ganchev D. A systematic re -
view of reviews in patellofemoral pain syndrome. Exploring the 
risk factors, diagnostic tests, outcome measurements and ex -
ercise treatment. Open Sports Med J . 2015;9:7-17 . https:// doi.
org/10.2174/1874387001509010007
Pappas E, Wong- T om WM. Prospective predictors of patellofemoral pain 
syndrome: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Health . 
2012;4:115-120. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /1941738111432097
Powers CM, Heino JG, Rao S, Perry J. The influence of patellofemoral 
pain on lower limb loading during gait. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 
1999;14:722-728. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0268-0033(99)00019-4
Powers CM, Witvrouw E, Davis IS, Crossley KM. Evidence-based 
framework for a pathomechanical model of patellofemoral pain: 
2017 patellofemoral pain consensus statement from the 4th Inter -
national Patellofemoral Pain Research Retreat, Manchester, UK: 
part 3. Br J Sports Med . 2017;51:1713-1723. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2017-098717
Rathleff MS, Rathleff CR, Crossley KM, Barton CJ. Is hip strength a 
risk factor for patellofemoral pain? A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2014;48:1088. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2013-093305
Sandow MJ, Goodfellow JW. The natural history of anterior knee pain in 
adolescents. J Bone Joint Surg Br . 1985;67:36-38.
Schiphof D, van Middelkoop M, de Klerk BM, et al. Crepitus is a first 
indication of patellofemoral osteoarthritis (and not of tibiofemoral 
osteoarthritis). Osteoarthritis Cartilage . 2014;22:631-638. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2014.02.008
Thomas MJ, Wood L, Selfe J, Peat G. Anterior knee pain in younger 
adults as a precursor to subsequent patellofemoral osteoarthritis: a 
systematic review. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . 2010;11:201. https://
doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-11-201
Thomeé R, Renström P , Karlsson J, Grimby G. Patellofemoral pain syn -
drome in young women: II. Muscle function in patients and healthy 
controls. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 1995;5:245-251. https:// doi.
org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.1995.tb00041.x
Utting MR, Davies G, Newman JH. Is anterior knee pain a predispos -
ing factor to patellofemoral osteoarthritis? Knee . 2005;12:362-365. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2004.12.006
van Middelkoop M, Bennell KL, Callaghan MJ, et al. International patel -
lofemoral osteoarthritis consortium: consensus statement on the 
diagnosis, burden, outcome measures, prognosis, risk factors and 
treatment. Semin Arthritis Rheum . 2018;47:666-675. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2017 .09.009APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg73
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesWillson JD, Davis IS. Utility of the frontal plane projection angle in 
females with patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2008;38:606-615. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.2706
Wyndow N, Collins N, Vicenzino B, T ucker K, Crossley K. Is there a 
biomechanical link between patellofemoral pain and osteoarthritis? 
A narrative review. Sports Med . 2016;46:1797-1808. https:// doi.
org/10.1007 / s40279-016-0545-6
Risk Factors
Apibantaweesakul S. Comparison of knee muscle balance at dif -
ferent knee flexion angles between patients with patellofemoral 
pain syndrome with healthy subjects. Walailak J Sci T echnol . 
2017;14:637-643.
Aysin IK, Askin A, Mete BD, Guvendi E, Aysin M, Kocyigit H. Investiga -
tion of the relationship between anterior knee pain and chondro -
malacia patellae and patellofemoral malalignment. Eurasian J Med . 
2018;50:28-33. https:// doi.org/10.5152/ eurasianjmed.2018.17277
Barton CJ, Bonanno D, Levinger P , Menz HB. Foot and ankle character -
istics in patellofemoral pain syndrome: a case control and reliability 
study. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2010;40:286-296. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2010.3227
Barton CJ, Levinger P , Menz HB, Webster KE. Kinematic gait character -
istics associated with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic 
review. Gait Posture . 2009;30:405-416. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
gaitpost.2009.07 .109
Bolgla LA, Earl-Boehm J, Emery C, Hamstra-Wright K, Ferber R. 
Comparison of hip and knee strength in males with and without 
patellofemoral pain. Phys Ther Sport . 2015;16:215-221. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.ptsp.2014.11.001
Bolgla LA, Earl-Boehm J, Emery C, Hamstra-Wright K, Ferber R. Pain, 
function, and strength outcomes for males and females with patel -
lofemoral pain who participate in either a hip/ core- or knee-based 
rehabilitation program. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2016;11:926-935.
Boling M, Padua D, Marshall S, Guskiewicz K, Pyne S, Beutler A. Gen -
der differences in the incidence and prevalence of patellofemoral 
pain syndrome. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 2010;20:725-730. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.2009.00996.x
Boling MC, Padua DA, Creighton RA. Concentric and eccentric 
torque of the hip musculature in individuals with and without 
patellofemoral pain. J Athl T rain . 2009;44:7-13. https:// doi.
org/10.4085/1062-6050-44.1.7
Carlson VR, Boden BP , Shen A, Jackson JN, Y ao L, Sheehan FT . The 
tibial tubercle–trochlear groove distance is greater in patients with 
patellofemoral pain: implications for the origin of pain and clinical 
interventions. Am J Sports Med . 2017;45:1110-1116. https:// doi.
org/10.1177 /0363546516681002
Collins N, Crossley K, Beller E, Darnell R, McPoil T , Vicenzino B. Foot 
orthoses and physiotherapy in the treatment of patellofemo -
ral pain syndrome: randomised clinical trial. Br J Sports Med . 
2009;43:169-171.Collins NJ, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, Crossley KM, van Linschoten RL, 
Vicenzino B, van Middelkoop M. Prognostic factors for patellofemo -
ral pain: a multicentre observational analysis. Br J Sports Med . 
2013;47:227-233. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2012-091696
de Moura Campos Carvalho-e-Silva AP , Almeida GPL, Magalhães MO, 
et al. Dynamic postural stability and muscle strength in patellofemo -
ral pain: is there a correlation? Knee . 2016;23:616-621. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.knee.2016.04.013
De Oliveira Silva D, Rathleff MS, Petersen K, Azevedo FM, Barton CJ. 
Manifestations of pain sensitization across different painful knee 
disorders: a systematic review including meta-analysis and metare -
gression. Pain Med . 2019;20:335-358. https:// doi.org/10.1093/ pm/
pny177
Dowling GJ, Murley GS, Munteanu SE, et al. Dynamic foot function as a 
risk factor for lower limb overuse injury: a systematic review. J Foot 
Ankle Res . 2014;7:53. https:// doi.org/10.1186/ s13047-014-0053-6
Giles LS, Webster KE, McClelland JA, Cook J. Does quadriceps atrophy 
exist in individuals with patellofemoral pain? A systematic literature 
review with meta-analysis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2013;43:766-
776. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.4833
Guney H, Yuksel I, Kaya D, Doral MN. Correlation between quadriceps 
to hamstring ratio and functional outcomes in patellofemoral pain. 
Knee . 2016;23:610-615. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2016.04.004
Hall R, Barber Foss K, Hewett TE, Myer GD. Sport specialization’s as -
sociation with an increased risk of developing anterior knee pain in 
adolescent female athletes. J Sport Rehabil . 2015;24:31-35. https://
doi.org/10.1123/jsr.2013-0101
Hoglund LT , Burns RO, Stepney AL, Jr. Do males with patellofemoral 
pain have posterolateral hip muscle weakness? Int J Sports Phys 
Ther. 2018;13:160-170.
Lankhorst NE, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, van Middelkoop M. Factors as -
sociated with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. 
Br J Sports Med . 2013;47:193-206. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2011-090369
Luedke LE, Heiderscheit BC, Williams DS, Rauh MJ. Association 
of isometric strength of hip and knee muscles with injury risk 
in high school cross country runners. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 
2015;10:868-876.
Maclachlan LR, Collins NJ, Matthews MLG, Hodges PW, Vicenzino B. 
The psychological features of patellofemoral pain: a systematic 
review. Br J Sports Med . 2017;51:732-742. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2016-096705
Matthews M, Rathleff MS, Claus A, et al. Can we predict the outcome 
for people with patellofemoral pain? A systematic review on prog -
nostic factors and treatment effect modifiers. Br J Sports Med . 
2017;51:1650-1660. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096545
McMoreland A, O’Sullivan K, Sainsbury D, Clifford A, McCreesh K. No 
deficit in hip isometric strength or concentric endurance in young fe -
males with mild patellofemoral pain. Isokinet Exerc Sci . 2011;19:117-
125. https:// doi.org/10.3233/IES-2011-0405APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg74   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesMcPoil TG, Warren M, Vicenzino B, Cornwall MW. Variations in foot pos -
ture and mobility between individuals with patellofemoral pain and 
those in a control group. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc . 2011;101:289-296. 
https:// doi.org/10.7547 /1010289
Mucha MD, Caldwell W, Schlueter EL, Walters C, Hassen A. Hip abduc -
tor strength and lower extremity running related injury in distance 
runners: a systematic review. J Sci Med Sport . 2017;20:349-355. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2016.09.002
Neal BS, Barton CJ, Gallie R, O’Halloran P , Morrissey D. Runners 
with patellofemoral pain have altered biomechanics which tar -
geted interventions can modify: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Gait Posture . 2016;45:69-82. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
gaitpost.2015.11.018
Panken AM, Heymans MW, van Oort L, Verhagen AP . Clinical prognostic 
factors for patients with anterior knee pain in physical therapy; a 
systematic review. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2015;10:929-945.
Pappas E, Wong- T om WM. Prospective predictors of patellofemoral pain 
syndrome: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Health . 
2012;4:115-120. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /1941738111432097
Park SK, Stefanyshyn DJ. Greater Q angle may not be a risk factor 
of Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 
2011;26:392-396. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2010.11.015
Ramskov D, Barton C, Nielsen RO, Rasmussen S. High eccentric hip 
abduction strength reduces the risk of developing patellofemoral 
pain among novice runners initiating a self-structured running 
program: a 1-year observational study. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2015;45:153-161. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2015.5091
Semciw A, Neate R, Pizzari T . Running related gluteus medius func -
tion in health and injury: a systematic review with meta-analysis. J 
Electromyogr Kinesiol . 2016;30:98-110. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
jelekin.2016.06.005
Steinberg N, T enenbaum S, Hershkovitz I, Zeev A, Siev-Ner I. Lower ex -
tremity and spine characteristics in young dancers with and without 
patellofemoral pain. Res Sports Med . 2017;25:166-180. https:// doi.or
g/10.1080/15438627 .2017 .1282355
T an JM, Crossley KM, Vicenzino B, Menz HB, Munteanu SE, Collins 
NJ. Age-related differences in foot mobility in individuals with patel -
lofemoral pain. J Foot Ankle Res . 2018;11:5. https:// doi.org/10.1186/
s13047-018-0249-2
Van Cant J, Pineux C, Pitance L, Feipel V . Hip muscle strength and 
endurance in females with patellofemoral pain: a systematic review 
with meta-analysis. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2014;9:564-582.
Van Cant J, Pitance L, Feipel V . Hip abductor, trunk extensor and ankle 
plantar flexor endurance in females with and without patellofemoral 
pain. J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil . 2017;30:299-307 . https:// doi.
org/10.3233/BMR-150505
Van Tiggelen D, Witvrouw E, Coorevits P , Croisier JL, Roget P . Analysis of 
isokinetic parameters in the development of anterior knee pain syn -
drome: a prospective study in a military setting. Isokinet Exerc Sci . 
2004;12:223-228. https:// doi.org/10.3233/IES-2004-0178Vicenzino B, Collins N, Crossley K, Beller E, Darnell R, McPoil T . Foot 
orthoses and physiotherapy in the treatment of patellofemoral pain 
syndrome: a randomised clinical trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . 
2008;9:27 . https:// doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-9-27
Waryasz GR, McDermott A Y . Patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS): a 
systematic review of anatomy and potential risk factors. Dyn Med . 
2008;7:9. https:// doi.org/10.1186/1476-5918-7-9
Witvrouw E, Lysens R, Bellemans J, Cambier D, Vanderstraeten G. 
Intrinsic risk factors for the development of anterior knee pain in an 
athletic population. A two-year prospective study. Am J Sports Med . 
2000;28:480-489. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /03635465000280040701
Diagnosis/Classification
Adu J, Nixon M, Bass A. A child with knee pain. BMJ. 2012;344:e250. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e250
Agre JC, Magness JL, Hull SZ, et al. Strength testing with a portable 
dynamometer: reliability for upper and lower extremities. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil . 1987;68:454-458.
Almeida GPL, Silva AP , França F J, Magalhães MO, Burke TN, Marques 
AP . Relationship between frontal plane projection angle of the knee 
and hip and trunk strength in women with and without patellofemo -
ral pain. J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil . 2016;29:259-266. https://
doi.org/10.3233/BMR-150622
Ardern CL, Österberg A, T agesson S, Gauffin H, Webster KE, Kvist 
J. The impact of psychological readiness to return to sport and 
recreational activities after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruc -
tion. Br J Sports Med . 2014;48:1613-1619. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2014-093842
Ardern CL, T aylor NF , Feller JA, Webster KE. Fear of re-injury in people 
who have returned to sport following anterior cruciate ligament re -
construction surgery. J Sci Med Sport . 2012;15:488-495. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.jsams.2012.03.015
Ardern CL, T aylor NF , Feller JA, Whitehead TS, Webster KE. Psychologi -
cal responses matter in returning to preinjury level of sport after 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction surgery. Am J Sports Med . 
2013;41:1549-1558. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546513489284
Bachmann LM, Haberzeth S, Steurer J, ter Riet G. The accuracy 
of the Ottawa knee rule to rule out knee fractures: a system -
atic review. Ann Intern Med . 2004;140:121-124. https:// doi.
org/10.7326/0003-4819-140-5-200403020-00013
Baker RL, Fredericson M. Iliotibial band syndrome in runners: biome -
chanical implications and exercise interventions. Phys Med Rehabil 
Clin N Am . 2016;27:53-77 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.pmr.2015.08.001
Baptista AM, Sargentini SC, Zumárraga JP , Camargo AF , Camargo OP . 
T umors of the patella: the experience of Institute of Orthopedics and 
T raumatology at University of São Paulo, Brazil. Acta Ortop Bras . 
2016;24:151-154. https:// doi.org/10.1590/1413-785220162403159158
Barton CJ, Lack S, Hemmings S, T ufail S, Morrissey D. The ‘Best 
Practice Guide to Conservative Management of Patellofemoral 
Pain’: incorporating level 1 evidence with expert clinical reason -
ing. Br J Sports Med . 2015;49:923-934. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2014-093637APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg75
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesBarton CJ, Lack S, Malliaras P , Morrissey D. Gluteal muscle activity and 
patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med . 
2013;47:207-214. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2012-090953
Barton CJ, Levinger P , Menz HB, Webster KE. Kinematic gait character -
istics associated with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic 
review. Gait Posture . 2009;30:405-416. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
gaitpost.2009.07 .109
Bartynski WS, Petropoulou KA. The MR imaging features and clini -
cal correlates in low back pain–related syndromes. Magn Reson 
Imaging Clin N Am . 2007;15:137-154. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
mric.2007 .01.010
Bergbom S, Boersma K, Overmeer T , Linton SJ. Relationship among 
pain catastrophizing, depressed mood, and outcomes across physi -
cal therapy treatments. Phys Ther . 2011;91:754-764. https:// doi.
org/10.2522/ ptj.20100136
Blanpied PR, Gross AR, Elliott JM, et al. Neck pain: revision 2017 . J 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2017;47:A1-A83. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2017 .0302
Bohannon RW. Reference values for extremity muscle strength ob -
tained by hand-held dynamometry from adults aged 20 to 79 years. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 1997;78:26-32. https:// doi.org/10.1016/
S0003-9993(97)90005-8
Bonacci J, Hall M, Saunders N, Vicenzino B. Gait retraining versus 
foot orthoses for patellofemoral pain: a pilot randomised clinical 
trial. J Sci Med Sport . 2018;21:457-461. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
jsams.2017 .09.187
Briani RV , Pazzinatto MF , De Oliveira Silva D, Azevedo FM. Different 
pain responses to distinct levels of physical activity in women with 
patellofemoral pain. Braz J Phys Ther . 2017;21:138-143. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.bjpt.2017 .03.009
Brushøj C, Larsen K, Albrecht-Beste E, Nielsen MB, Løye F , Hölmich P . 
Prevention of overuse injuries by a concurrent exercise program in 
subjects exposed to an increase in training load: a randomized con -
trolled trial of 1020 army recruits. Am J Sports Med . 2008;36:663-
670. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546508315469
Buckland AJ, Miyamoto R, Patel RD, Slover J, Razi AE. Differentiating 
hip pathology from lumbar spine pathology: key points of evalua -
tion and management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg . 2017;25:e23-e34. 
https:// doi.org/10.5435/ JAAOS-D-15-00740
Calmbach WL, Hutchens M. Evaluation of patients presenting with 
knee pain: part II. Differential diagnosis. Am Fam Physician . 
2003;68:917-922.
Carow SD, Houser JD. T rainees with displaced hip fractures pres -
ent to physical therapy with primary complaint of knee pain. 
Mil Med . 2017;182:e2095-e2098. https:// doi.org/10.7205/
MILMED-D-17-00156
Childs JD, Cleland JA, Elliott JM, et al. Neck pain. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2008;38:A1-A34. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.0303
Cibulka MT , Bloom NJ, Enseki KR, MacDonald CW, Woehrle J, Mc -
Donough CM. Hip pain and mobility deficits—hip osteoarthritis: 
revision 2017 . J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2017;47:A1-A37 . https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2017 .0301Cibulka MT , White DM, Woehrle J, et al. Hip pain and mobility deficits 
– hip osteoarthritis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2009;39:A1-A25. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2009.0301
Collado H, Fredericson M. Patellofemoral pain syndrome. Clin Sports 
Med. 2010;29:379-398. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.csm.2010.03.012
Collins NJ, Vicenzino B, van der Heijden RA, van Middelkoop M. Pain 
during prolonged sitting is a common problem in persons with 
patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2016;46:658-663. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6470
Cook C, Hegedus E, Hawkins R, Scovell F , Wyland D. Diagnostic accu -
racy and association to disability of clinical test findings associated 
with patellofemoral pain syndrome. Physiother Can . 2010;62:17-24. 
https:// doi.org/10.3138/ physio.62.1.17
Cook C, Mabry L, Reiman MP , Hegedus EJ. Best tests/ clinical find -
ings for screening and diagnosis of patellofemoral pain syndrome: 
a systematic review. Physiotherapy . 2012;98:93-100. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.physio.2011.09.001
Cook CE. Orthopedic Manual Therapy: An Evidence-Based Approach . 
2nd ed. Boston, MA: Pearson; 2011.
Crossley KM, Callaghan MJ, van Linschoten R. Patellofemoral pain. 
Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:247-250. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2015-h3939rep
Crossley KM, Stefanik JJ, Selfe J, et al. 2016 patellofemoral pain con -
sensus statement from the 4th International Patellofemoral Pain 
Research Retreat, Manchester. Part 1: terminology, definitions, clini -
cal examination, natural history, patellofemoral osteoarthritis and 
patient-reported outcome measures. Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:839-
843. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096384
Culvenor AG, Collins NJ, Vicenzino B, et al. Predictors and effects of 
patellofemoral pain following hamstring-tendon ACL reconstruc -
tion. J Sci Med Sport . 2016;19:518-523. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
jsams.2015.07 .008
Culvenor AG, Øiestad BE, Holm I, Gunderson RB, Crossley KM, Risberg 
MA. Anterior knee pain following anterior cruciate ligament recon -
struction does not increase the risk of patellofemoral osteoarthritis 
at 15- and 20-year follow-ups. Osteoarthritis Cartilage . 2017;25:30-
33. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2016.09.012
Delitto A, George SZ, Van Dillen L, et al. Low back pain. J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther . 2012;42:A1-A57 . https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2012.42.4.A1
Draper CE, Fredericson M, Gold GE, et al. Patients with patellofemoral 
pain exhibit elevated bone metabolic activity at the patellofemoral 
joint. J Orthop Res . 2012;30:209-213. https:// doi.org/10.1002/
jor.21523
Dye SF . The pathophysiology of patellofemoral pain: a tissue homeo -
stasis perspective. Clin Orthop Relat Res . 2005;436:100-110. https://
doi.org/10.1097 /01.blo.0000172303.74414.7d
Emparanza JI, Aginaga JR. Validation of the Ottawa Knee Rules. 
Ann Emerg Med . 2001;38:364-368. https:// doi.org/10.1067 /
mem.2001.118011APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg76   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesEsculier JF , Bouyer LJ, Dubois B, Frémont P , Moore L, Roy JS. Effects 
of rehabilitation approaches for runners with patellofemoral pain: 
protocol of a randomised clinical trial addressing specific underly -
ing mechanisms. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . 2016;17:5. https:// doi.
org/10.1186/ s12891-015-0859-9
Ferber R, Bolgla L, Earl-Boehm JE, Emery C, Hamstra-Wright K. 
Strengthening of the hip and core versus knee muscles for 
the treatment of patellofemoral pain: a multicenter random -
ized controlled trial. J Athl T rain . 2015;50:366-377 . https:// doi.
org/10.4085/1062-6050-49.3.70
Fulkerson JP . Diagnosis and treatment of patients with patellofemoral 
pain. Am J Sports Med . 2002;30:447-456. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /03
635465020300032501
George SZ, Beneciuk JM, Bialosky JE, et al. Development of a review-
of-systems screening tool for orthopaedic physical therapists: 
results from the Optimal Screening for Prediction of Referral and 
Outcome (OSPRO) cohort. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2015;45:512-
526. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2015.5900
George SZ, Beneciuk JM, Lentz T A, Wu SS. The Optimal Screening 
for Prediction of Referral and Outcome (OSPRO) in patients with 
musculoskeletal pain conditions: a longitudinal validation cohort 
from the USA. BMJ Open . 2017;7:e015188. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2016-015188
Glaviano NR, Baellow A, Saliba S. Physical activity levels in individuals 
with and without patellofemoral pain. Phys Ther Sport . 2017;27:12-16. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.ptsp.2017 .07 .002
Graci V , Salsich GB. T runk and lower extremity segment kinematics 
and their relationship to pain following movement instruction dur -
ing a single-leg squat in females with dynamic knee valgus and 
patellofemoral pain. J Sci Med Sport . 2015;18:343-347 . https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.jsams.2014.04.011
Gwynne CR, Curran SA. T wo-dimensional frontal plane projection 
angle can identify subgroups of patellofemoral pain patients who 
demonstrate dynamic knee valgus. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 
2018;58:44-48. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2018.06.021
Haim A, Y aniv M, Dekel S, Amir H. Patellofemoral pain syn -
drome: validity of clinical and radiological features. Clin Or -
thop Relat Res . 2006;451:223-228. https:// doi.org/10.1097 /01.
blo.0000229284.45485.6c
Halabchi F , Abolhasani M, Mirshahi M, Alizadeh Z. Patellofemoral 
pain in athletes: clinical perspectives. Open Access J Sports Med . 
2017;8:189-203. https:// doi.org/10.2147 /OAJSM.S127359
Hamstra-Wright KL, Earl-Boehm J, Bolgla L, Emery C, Ferber R. Indi -
viduals with patellofemoral pain have less hip flexibility than controls 
regardless of treatment outcome. Clin J Sport Med . 2017;27:97-103. 
https:// doi.org/10.1097 / JSM.0000000000000307
Herbst KA, Barber Foss KD, Fader L, et al. Hip strength is greater in 
athletes who subsequently develop patellofemoral pain. Am J Sports 
Med. 2015;43:2747-2752. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546515599628
Herrington L. Knee valgus angle during single leg squat and landing 
in patellofemoral pain patients and controls. Knee . 2014;21:514-517 . 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2013.11.011Ho KY , Hu HH, Colletti PM, Powers CM. Recreational runners with 
patellofemoral pain exhibit elevated patella water content. Magn 
Reson Imaging . 2014;32:965-968. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
mri.2014.04.018
Holmes SW, Jr., Clancy WG, Jr. Clinical classification of patellofemoral 
pain and dysfunction. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1998;28:299-306. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.1998.28.5.299
Insall J. “Chondromalacia patellae”: patellar malalignment syndrome. 
Orthop Clin North Am . 1979;10:117-127 .
Kaufman KR, Brodine S, Shaffer R. Military training-related injuries: 
surveillance, research, and prevention. Am J Prev Med . 2000;18:54-
63. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0749-3797(00)00114-8
Kelley MJ, Shaffer MA, Kuhn JE, et al. Shoulder pain and mobility defi -
cits: adhesive capsulitis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2013;43:A1-A31. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.0302
Kobayashi S, Pappas E, Fransen M, Refshauge K, Simic M. The preva -
lence of patellofemoral osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage . 2016;24:1697-1707 . https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.joca.2016.05.011
Koh JL, Stewart C. Patellar instability. Orthop Clin North Am . 
2015;46:147-157 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.ocl.2014.09.011
Konan S, Zang TT , T amimi N, Haddad FS. Can the Ottawa and Pitts -
burgh rules reduce requests for radiography in patients referred to 
acute knee clinics? Ann R Coll Surg Engl . 2013;95:188-191. https://
doi.org/10.1308/003588413X13511609954699
Kramer JF , Vaz MD, Vandervoort AA. Reliability of isometric hip abduc -
tor torques during examiner- and belt-resisted tests. J Gerontol . 
1991;46:M47-M51. https:// doi.org/10.1093/ geronj/ 46.2.M47
Lack S, Barton C, Sohan O, Crossley K, Morrissey D. Proximal muscle 
rehabilitation is effective for patellofemoral pain: a systematic review 
with meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2015;49:1365-1376. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2015-094723
Lam S, Amies V . Hip arthritis presenting as knee pain. BMJ Case 
Rep. 2015;2015:bcr2014208625. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bcr-2014-208625
Lee TQ, Morris G, Csintalan RP . The influence of tibial and femoral 
rotation on patellofemoral contact area and pressure. J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther . 2003;33:686-693. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2003.33.11.686
Lentz T A, Beneciuk JM, Bialosky JE, et al. Development of a yellow flag 
assessment tool for orthopaedic physical therapists: results from 
the Optimal Screening for Prediction of Referral and Outcome (OS -
PRO) cohort. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2016;46:327-343. https://
doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6487
Lesher JM, Dreyfuss P , Hager N, Kaplan M, Furman M. Hip joint pain re -
ferral patterns: a descriptive study. Pain Med . 2008;9:22-25. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1526-4637 .2006.00153.x
Logerstedt DS, Scalzitti D, Risberg MA, et al. Knee stability and move -
ment coordination impairments: knee ligament sprain revision 2017 . 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2017;47:A1-A47 . https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2017 .0303APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg77
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesLogerstedt DS, Scalzitti DA, Bennell KL, et al. Knee pain and mobil -
ity impairments: meniscal and articular cartilage lesions revision 
2018. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2018;48:A1-A50. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2018.0301
Logerstedt DS, Snyder-Mackler L, Ritter RC, Axe MJ. Knee pain and 
mobility impairments: meniscal and articular cartilage lesions. J 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2010;40:A1-A35. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2010.0304
Logerstedt DS, Snyder-Mackler L, Ritter RC, Axe MJ, Godges JJ. Knee 
stability and movement coordination impairments: knee ligament 
sprain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2010;40:A1-A37 . https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2010.0303
Malliaras P , Cook J, Purdam C, Rio E. Patellar tendinopathy: clinical 
diagnosis, load management, and advice for challenging case pre -
sentations. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2015;45:887-898. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2015.5987
Mauro CS, Irrgang JJ, Williams BA, Harner CD. Loss of extension follow -
ing anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: analysis of incidence 
and etiology using IKDC criteria. Arthroscopy . 2008;24:146-153. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.arthro.2007 .08.026
McPoil TG, Vicenzino B, Cornwall MW, Collins N, Warren M. Reliability 
and normative values for the foot mobility magnitude: a composite 
measure of vertical and medial-lateral mobility of the midfoot. J Foot 
Ankle Res . 2009;2:6. https:// doi.org/10.1186/1757-1146-2-6
Merchant AC, Fulkerson JP , Leadbetter W. The diagnosis and initial 
treatment of patellofemoral disorders. Am J Orthop (Belle Mead NJ) . 
2017;46:68-75.
Mills K, Blanch P , Dev P , Martin M, Vicenzino B. A randomised control 
trial of short term efficacy of in-shoe foot orthoses compared with 
a wait and see policy for anterior knee pain and the role of foot 
mobility. Br J Sports Med . 2012;46:247-252. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2011-090204
Mueller MJ, Maluf KS. Tissue adaptation to physical stress: a proposed 
“Physical Stress Theory” to guide physical therapist practice, edu -
cation, and research. Phys Ther . 2002;82:383-403. https:// doi.
org/10.1093/ ptj/82.4.383
Munro A, Herrington L, Carolan M. Reliability of 2-dimensional video 
assessment of frontal-plane dynamic knee valgus during common 
athletic screening tasks. J Sport Rehabil . 2012;21:7-11. https:// doi.
org/10.1123/jsr.21.1.7
Nimon G, Murray D, Sandow M, Goodfellow J. Natural history of ante -
rior knee pain: a 14- to 20-year follow-up of nonoperative manage -
ment. J Pediatr Orthop . 1998;18:118-122.
Noehren B, Shuping L, Jones A, Akers DA, Bush HM, Sluka KA. So -
matosensory and biomechanical abnormalities in females with 
patellofemoral pain. Clin J Pain . 2016;32:915-919. https:// doi.
org/10.1097 / AJP .0000000000000331
Nunes GS, Stapait EL, Kirsten MH, de Noronha M, Santos GM. Clinical 
test for diagnosis of patellofemoral pain syndrome: systematic re -
view with meta-analysis. Phys Ther Sport . 2013;14:54-59. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.ptsp.2012.11.003Papadopoulos K, Stasinopoulos D, Ganchev D. A systematic re -
view of reviews in patellofemoral pain syndrome. Exploring the 
risk factors, diagnostic tests, outcome measurements and ex -
ercise treatment. Open Sports Med J . 2015;9:7-17 . https:// doi.
org/10.2174/1874387001509010007
Peat G, Bergknut C, Frobell R, Jöud A, Englund M. Population-wide 
incidence estimates for soft tissue knee injuries presenting to health -
care in southern Sweden: data from the Skåne Healthcare Register. 
Arthritis Res Ther . 2014;16:R162. https:// doi.org/10.1186/ ar4678
Peters JS, T yson NL. Proximal exercises are effective in treating patello -
femoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 
2013;8:689-700.
Piva SR, Fitzgerald K, Irrgang JJ, et al. Reliability of measures of impair -
ments associated with patellofemoral pain syndrome. BMC Musculo -
skelet Disord . 2006;7:33. https:// doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-7-33
Poppert E, Kulig K. Hip degenerative joint disease in a patient with me -
dial knee pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2011;41:33. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2011.0402
Post WR, Dye SF . Patellofemoral pain: an enigma explained by ho -
meostasis and common sense. Am J Orthop (Belle Mead NJ) . 
2017;46:92-100.
Powers CM. The influence of abnormal hip mechanics on knee injury: a 
biomechanical perspective. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2010;40:42-
51. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2010.3337
Powers CM. The influence of altered lower-extremity kinematics on 
patellofemoral joint dysfunction: a theoretical perspective. J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther . 2003;33:639-646. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2003.33.11.639
Prins MR, van der Wurff P . Females with patellofemoral pain syndrome 
have weak hip muscles: a systematic review. Aust J Physiother . 
2009;55:9-15. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0004-9514(09)70055-8
Rabin A, Kozol Z, Moran U, Efergan A, Geffen Y , Finestone AS. Factors 
associated with visually assessed quality of movement during a 
lateral step-down test among individuals with patellofemoral pain. J 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2014;44:937-946. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2014.5507
Ramos J, Perrotta C, Badariotti G, Berenstein G. Interventions for 
preventing venous thromboembolism in adults undergoing knee 
arthroscopy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2008:CD005259. https://
doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD005259.pub3
Redmond AC, Crosbie J, Ouvrier RA. Development and validation of a 
novel rating system for scoring standing foot posture: the Foot Pos -
ture Index. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 2006;21:89-98. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2005.08.002
Robertson A, Nutton RW, Keating JF . Dislocation of the 
knee. J Bone Joint Surg Br . 2006;88:706-711. https:// doi.
org/10.1302/0301-620X.88B6.17448
Roper JL, Harding EM, Doerfler D, et al. The effects of gait retrain -
ing in runners with patellofemoral pain: a randomized trial. Clin 
Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 2016;35:14-22. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
clinbiomech.2016.03.010APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg78   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesSalsich GB, Perman WH. Patellofemoral joint contact area is influenced 
by tibiofemoral rotation alignment in individuals who have patel -
lofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2007;37:521-528. https://
doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2007 .37 .9.521
Scholtes SA, Salsich GB. A dynamic valgus index that combines hip 
and knee angles: assessment of utility in females with patellofemoral 
pain. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2017;12:333-340.
Schutzer SF , Ramsby GR, Fulkerson JP . Computed tomographic clas -
sification of patellofemoral pain patients. Orthop Clin North Am . 
1986;17:235-248.
Seaberg DC, Jackson R. Clinical decision rule for knee radio -
graphs. Am J Emerg Med . 1994;12:541-543. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/0735-6757(94)90274-7
Selfe J, Callaghan M, Witvrouw E, et al. T argeted interventions for 
patellofemoral pain syndrome (TIPPS): classification of clinical 
subgroups. BMJ Open . 2013;3:e003795. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2013-003795
Selfe J, Janssen J, Callaghan M, et al. Are there three main subgroups 
within the patellofemoral pain population? A detailed characterisa -
tion study of 127 patients to help develop targeted intervention 
(TIPPs). Br J Sports Med . 2016;50:873-880. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2015-094792
Selhorst M, Rice W, Degenhart T , Jackowski M, T atman M. Evaluation 
of a treatment algorithm for patients with patellofemoral pain syn -
drome: a pilot study. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2015;10:178-188.
Sell KE, Verity TM, Worrell TW, Pease BJ, Wigglesworth J. T wo measure -
ment techniques for assessing subtalar joint position: a reliability 
study. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1994;19:162-167 . https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.1994.19.3.162
Sullivan MJ, Bishop SR, Pivik J. The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: devel -
opment and validation. Psychol Assess . 1995;7:524-532. https:// doi.
org/10.1037 /1040-3590.7 .4.524
T aunton JE, Ryan MB, Clement DB, McKenzie DC, Lloyd-Smith DR, 
Zumbo BD. A retrospective case-control analysis of 2002 running 
injuries. Br J Sports Med . 2002;36:95-101. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsm.36.2.95
T enforde AS, Sayres LC, McCurdy ML, Collado H, Sainani KL, Frederic -
son M. Overuse injuries in high school runners: lifetime prevalence 
and prevention strategies. PM R . 2011;3:125-131; quiz 131. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pmrj.2010.09.009
Thijs Y , De Clercq D, Roosen P , Witvrouw E. Gait-related intrinsic 
risk factors for patellofemoral pain in novice recreational run -
ners. Br J Sports Med . 2008;42:466-471. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsm.2008.046649
Thijs Y , Pattyn E, Van Tiggelen D, Rombaut L, Witvrouw E. Is hip 
muscle weakness a predisposing factor for patellofemoral pain 
in female novice runners? A prospective study. Am J Sports Med . 
2011;39:1877-1882. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546511407617
Thijs Y , Van Tiggelen D, Roosen P , De Clercq D, Witvrouw E. A prospec -
tive study on gait-related intrinsic risk factors for patellofemoral 
pain. Clin J Sport Med . 2007;17:437-445. https:// doi.org/10.1097 /
JSM.0b013e31815ac44fVan T ongel A, Stuyck J, Bellemans J, Vandenneucker H. Septic 
arthritis after arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament reconstruc -
tion: a retrospective analysis of incidence, management and 
outcome. Am J Sports Med . 2007;35:1059-1063. https:// doi.
org/10.1177 /0363546507299443
Waddell G, Newton M, Henderson I, Somerville D, Main CJ. A Fear-
Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire (FABQ) and the role of fear-
avoidance beliefs in chronic low back pain and disability. Pain. 
1993;52:157-168. https:// doi.org/10.1016/0304-3959(93)90127-B
Weatherall M. Information provided by diagnostic and screening tests: 
improving probabilities. Postgrad Med J . 2018;94:230-235. https://
doi.org/10.1136/ postgradmedj-2017-135273
Weishaar MD, McMillian DM, Moore JH. Identification and manage -
ment of 2 femoral shaft stress injuries. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2005;35:665-673. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2005.35.10.665
Wilk KE, Davies GJ, Mangine RE, Malone TR. Patellofemoral disorders: 
a classification system and clinical guidelines for nonoperative reha -
bilitation. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1998;28:307-322. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.1998.28.5.307
Willson JD, Davis IS. Utility of the frontal plane projection angle in 
females with patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2008;38:606-615. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.2706
Willson JD, Ireland ML, Davis I. Core strength and lower extremity align -
ment during single leg squats. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2006;38:945-
952. https:// doi.org/10.1249/01.mss.0000218140.05074.fa
Witvrouw E, Callaghan MJ, Stefanik JJ, et al. Patellofemoral pain: con -
sensus statement from the 3rd International Patellofemoral Pain Re -
search Retreat held in Vancouver, September 2013. Br J Sports Med . 
2014;48:411-414. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093450
Witvrouw E, Crossley K, Davis I, McConnell J, Powers CM. The 3rd 
International Patellofemoral Research Retreat: an international 
expert consensus meeting to improve the scientific understanding 
and clinical management of patellofemoral pain. Br J Sports Med . 
2014;48:408. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093437
Witvrouw E, Werner S, Mikkelsen C, Van Tiggelen D, Vanden Berghe 
L, Cerulli G. Clinical classification of patellofemoral pain syn -
drome: guidelines for non-operative treatment. Knee Surg Sports 
T raumatol Arthrosc . 2005;13:122-130. https:// doi.org/10.1007 /
s00167-004-0577-6
Wolf M. Knee pain in children: part I: evaluation. Pediatr Rev . 
2016;37:18-23; quiz 24, 47 . https:// doi.org/10.1542/ pir.2015-0040
Wolf M. Knee pain in children, part II: limb- and life-threatening condi -
tions, hip pathology, and effusion. Pediatr Rev . 2016;37:72-76; quiz 
7 7.  https:// doi.org/10.1542/ pir.2015-0041
Wolf M. Knee pain in children, part III: stress injuries, benign bone tu -
mors, growing pains. Pediatr Rev . 2016;37:114-118; quiz 119. https://
doi.org/10.1542/ pir.2015-0042APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg79
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesExamination
Self-report Measures
Alshehri A, Lohman E, Daher NS, et al. Cross-cultural adaptation and 
psychometric properties testing of the Arabic Anterior Knee Pain 
Scale. Med Sci Monit . 2017;23:1559-1582. https:// doi.org/10.12659/
msm.901264
Bradbury M, Brosky JA, Jr., Walker JF , West K. Relationship between 
scores from the Knee Outcome Survey and a single assessment 
numerical rating in patients with patellofemoral pain. Physiother 
Theory Pract . 2013;29:531-535. https:// doi.org/10.3109/09593985.
2012.762077
Buckinx F , Bornheim S, Remy G, et al. French translation and validation of 
the “ Anterior Knee Pain Scale” (AKPS). Disabil Rehabil . 2019;41:1089-
1094. https:// doi.org/10.1080/09638288.2017 .1419288
Celik D, Co şkunsu D, Kılıço ğlu Ö. T ranslation and cultural adaptation of 
the T urkish Lysholm knee scale: ease of use, validity, and reliability. 
Clin Orthop Relat Res . 2013;471:2602-2610. https:// doi.org/10.1007 /
s11999-013-3046-z
Chesworth BM, Culham E, T ata GE, Peat M. Validation of outcome 
measures in patients with patellofemoral syndrome. J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther . 1989;10:302-308. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.1989.10.8.302
Cheung RT , Ngai SP , Lam PL, Chiu JK, Fung EY . Chinese adaptation and 
validation of the Patellofemoral Pain Severity Scale. Clin Rehabil . 
2013;27:468-472. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0269215512456309
Cheung RT , Ngai SP , Lam PL, Chiu JK, Fung EY . Chinese translation and 
validation of the Kujala scale for patients with patellofemoral pain. 
Disabil Rehabil . 2012;34:510-513. https:// doi.org/10.3109/0963828
8.2011.610494
Crossley KM, Bennell KL, Cowan SM, Green S. Analysis of outcome 
measures for persons with patellofemoral pain: which are reliable 
and valid? Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 2004;85:815-822. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/S0003-9993(03)00613-0
Crossley KM, Macri EM, Cowan SM, Collins NJ, Roos EM. The patel -
lofemoral pain and osteoarthritis subscale of the KOOS (KOOS-
PF): development and validation using the COSMIN checklist. 
Br J Sports Med . 2018;52:1130-1136. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2016-096776
da Cunha RA, Costa LO, Hespanhol Junior LC, Pires RS, Kujala UM, 
Lopes AD. T ranslation, cross-cultural adaptation, and clinimetric 
testing of instruments used to assess patients with patellofemoral 
pain syndrome in the Brazilian population. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2013;43:332-339. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.4228
Esculier JF , Roy JS, Bouyer LJ. Psychometric evidence of self-reported 
questionnaires for patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic re -
view. Disabil Rehabil . 2013;35:2181-2190. https:// doi.org/10.3109/09
638288.2013.774061
Evcik D, Ay S, Ege A, T urel A, Kavuncu V . Adaptation and validation of 
T urkish version of the Knee Outcome Survey-Activities for Daily Liv -
ing Scale. Clin Orthop Relat Res . 2009;467:2077-2082. https:// doi.
org/10.1007 / s11999-009-0826-6Gil-Gámez J, Pecos-Martín D, Kujala UM, et al. Validation and cul -
tural adaptation of “Kujala Score” in Spanish. Knee Surg Sports 
T raumatol Arthrosc . 2016;24:2845-2853. https:// doi.org/10.1007 /
s00167-015-3521-z
Green A, Liles C, Rushton A, Kyte DG. Measurement properties of 
patient-reported outcome measures (PROMS) in Patellofemoral Pain 
Syndrome: a systematic review. Man Ther . 2014;19:517-526. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2014.05.013
Howe TE, Dawson LJ, Syme G, Duncan L, Reid J. Evaluation of outcome 
measures for use in clinical practice for adults with musculoskeletal 
conditions of the knee: a systematic review. Man Ther . 2012;17:100-
118. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2011.07 .002
Ittenbach RF , Huang G, Barber Foss KD, Hewett TE, Myer GD. Reliability 
and validity of the Anterior Knee Pain Scale: applications for use as 
an epidemiologic screener. PLoS One . 2016;11:e0159204. https:// doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0159204
Kuru T , Dereli EE, Y aliman A. Validity of the T urkish version of the 
Kujala patellofemoral score in patellofemoral pain syndrome. Acta 
Orthop T raumatol T urc . 2010;44:152-156. https:// doi.org/10.3944/
AOTT .2010.2252
Laprade JA, Culham EG. A self-administered pain severity scale for 
patellofemoral pain syndrome. Clin Rehabil . 2002;16:780-788. 
https:// doi.org/10.1191/0269215502cr553oa
Myer GD, Barber Foss KD, Gupta R, Hewett TE, Ittenbach RF . Analy -
sis of patient-reported Anterior Knee Pain Scale: implications for 
scale development in children and adolescents. Knee Surg Sports 
T raumatol Arthrosc . 2016;24:653-660. https:// doi.org/10.1007 /
s00167-014-3004-7
Negahban H, Pouretezad M, Sohani SM, Mazaheri M, Salavati M, 
Mohammadi F . Validation of the Persian version of Functional Index 
Questionnaire (FIQ) and Modified FIQ in patients with patellofemoral 
pain syndrome. Physiother Theory Pract . 2013;29:521-530. https://
doi.org/10.3109/09593985.2012.761308
Negahban H, Pouretezad M, Y azdi MJ, et al. Persian translation and 
validation of the Kujala Patellofemoral Scale in patients with patello -
femoral pain syndrome. Disabil Rehabil . 2012;34:2259-2263. https://
doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2012.683480
Papadopoulos C, Constantinou A, Cheimonidou AZ, Stasinopoulos D. 
Greek cultural adaption and validation of the Kujala anterior knee 
pain scale in patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome. Disabil  
Rehabil . 2017;39:704-708. https:// doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2016 . 
1161834
Papadopoulos C, Nardi L, Antoniadou M, Stasinopoulos D. Greek 
adaptation and validation of the Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome 
Severity Scale. Hong Kong Physiother J . 2013;31:95-99. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.hkpj.2013.05.003
Papadopoulos K, Stasinopoulos D, Ganchev D. A systematic re -
view of reviews in patellofemoral pain syndrome. Exploring the 
risk factors, diagnostic tests, outcome measurements and ex -
ercise treatment. Open Sports Med J . 2015;9:7-17 . https:// doi.
org/10.2174/1874387001509010007APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg80   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPiva SR, Gil AB, Moore CG, Fitzgerald GK. Responsiveness of the activi -
ties of daily living scale of the Knee Outcome Survey and Numeric 
Pain Rating Scale in patients with patellofemoral pain. J Rehabil 
Med. 2009;41:129-135. https:// doi.org/10.2340/16501977-0295
Sakunkaruna S, Sakunkaruna Y , Sakulsriprasert P . Thai version of the 
Kujala Patellofemoral Questionnaire in knee pain patients: cross-cul -
tural validation and test-retest reliability. J Med Assoc Thai . 2015;98 
suppl 5:S81-S85.
Selfe J, Harper L, Pedersen I, Breen- T urner J, Waring J. Four outcome 
measures for patellofemoral joint problems: part 1. Development and 
validity. Physiotherapy . 2001;87:507-515. https:// doi.org/10.1016/
S0031-9406(05)65448-X
Selfe J, Harper L, Pedersen I, Breen- T urner J, Waring J. Four outcome 
measures for patellofemoral joint problems: part 2. Reliability and 
clinical sensitivity. Physiotherapy . 2001;87:516-522. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/S0031-9406(05)65449-1
Siqueira DA, Baraúna MA, Dionísio VC. Functional evaluation 
of the knee in subjects with patellofemoral pain syndrome 
(PFPS): comparison between KOS and IKDC scales. Rev Bras 
Med Esporte . 2012;18:400-403. https:// doi.org/10.1590/
S1517-86922012000600011
Ummels PE, Lenssen AF , Barendrecht M, Beurskens AJ. Reliability of 
the Dutch translation of the Kujala Patellofemoral Score Question -
naire. Physiother Res Int . 2017;22:e1649. https:// doi.org/10.1002/
pri.1649
Watson CJ, Propps M, Ratner J, Zeigler DL, Horton P , Smith SS. Reli -
ability and responsiveness of the Lower Extremity Functional Scale 
and the Anterior Knee Pain Scale in patients with anterior knee 
pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2005;35:136-146. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2005.35.3.136
Physical Performance Measures
Agre JC, Magness JL, Hull SZ, et al. Strength testing with a portable 
dynamometer: reliability for upper and lower extremities. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil . 1987;68:454-458.
Almeida GPL, das Neves Rodrigues HL, de Freitas BW, de Paula Lima 
PO. Reliability and validity of the Hip Stability Isometric T est (Hip -
SIT): a new method to assess hip posterolateral muscle strength. J 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2017;47:906-913. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2017 .7274
Bohannon RW. Reference values for extremity muscle strength ob -
tained by hand-held dynamometry from adults aged 20 to 79 years. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 1997;78:26-32. https:// doi.org/10.1016/
S0003-9993(97)90005-8
Chmielewski TL, Stackhouse S, Axe MJ, Snyder-Mackler L. A prospec -
tive analysis of incidence and severity of quadriceps inhibition in a 
consecutive sample of 100 patients with complete acute anterior 
cruciate ligament rupture. J Orthop Res . 2004;22:925-930. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.orthres.2004.01.007
Collins NJ, Vicenzino B, van der Heijden RA, van Middelkoop M. Pain 
during prolonged sitting is a common problem in persons with 
patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2016;46:658-663. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6470Cornwall MW, McPoil TG, Lebec M, Vicenzino B, Wilson J. Reliability 
of the modified Foot Posture Index. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc . 
2008;98:7-13. https:// doi.org/10.7547 /0980007
Décary S, Frémont P , Pelletier B, et al. Validity of combining history 
elements and physical examination tests to diagnose patellofemo -
ral pain. Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 2018;99:607-614.e1. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.apmr.2017 .10.014
Décary S, Ouellet P , Vendittoli PA, Desmeules F . Reliability of physical 
examination tests for the diagnosis of knee disorders: evidence 
from a systematic review. Man Ther . 2016;26:172-182. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2016.09.007
Elton K, McDonough K, Savinar E, Jensen GM. A preliminary investiga -
tion: history, physical, and isokinetic exam results versus arthroscop -
ic diagnosis of chondromalacia patella. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
1985;7:115-123. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.1985.7 .3.115
Greene CC, Edwards TB, Wade MR, Carson EW. Reliability of the quadri -
ceps angle measurement. Am J Knee Surg . 2001;14:97-103.
Haim A, Y aniv M, Dekel S, Amir H. Patellofemoral pain syn -
drome: validity of clinical and radiological features. Clin Or -
thop Relat Res . 2006;451:223-228. https:// doi.org/10.1097 /01.
blo.0000229284.45485.6c
Hamstra-Wright KL, Earl-Boehm J, Bolgla L, Emery C, Ferber R. Indi -
viduals with patellofemoral pain have less hip flexibility than controls 
regardless of treatment outcome. Clin J Sport Med . 2017;27:97-103. 
https:// doi.org/10.1097 / JSM.0000000000000307
Harris-Hayes M, Steger-May K, Koh C, Royer NK, Graci V , Salsich 
GB. Classification of lower extremity movement patterns based 
on visual assessment: reliability and correlation with 2-dimen -
sional video analysis. J Athl T rain . 2014;49:304-310. https:// doi.
org/10.4085/1062-6050-49.2.21
Kramer JF , Vaz MD, Vandervoort AA. Reliability of isometric hip abduc -
tor torques during examiner- and belt-resisted tests. J Gerontol . 
1991;46:M47-M51. https:// doi.org/10.1093/ geronj/ 46.2.M47
McPoil TG, Vicenzino B, Cornwall MW, Collins N, Warren M. Reliability 
and normative values for the foot mobility magnitude: a composite 
measure of vertical and medial-lateral mobility of the midfoot. J Foot 
Ankle Res . 2009;2:6. https:// doi.org/10.1186/1757-1146-2-6
McPoil TG, Warren M, Vicenzino B, Cornwall MW. Variations in foot pos -
ture and mobility between individuals with patellofemoral pain and 
those in a control group. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc . 2011;101:289-296. 
https:// doi.org/10.7547 /1010289
Mills K, Blanch P , Dev P , Martin M, Vicenzino B. A randomised control 
trial of short term efficacy of in-shoe foot orthoses compared with 
a wait and see policy for anterior knee pain and the role of foot 
mobility. Br J Sports Med . 2012;46:247-252. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2011-090204
Näslund J, Näslund UB, Odenbring S, Lundeberg T . Comparison of 
symptoms and clinical findings in subgroups of individuals with 
patellofemoral pain. Physiother Theory Pract . 2006;22:105-118. 
https:// doi.org/10.1080/09593980600724246
Nijs J, Van Geel C, Van der auwera C, Van de Velde B. Diagnostic value 
of five clinical tests in patellofemoral pain syndrome. Man Ther . 
2006;11:69-77 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2005.04.002APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg81
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesNunes GS, Stapait EL, Kirsten MH, de Noronha M, Santos GM. Clinical 
test for diagnosis of patellofemoral pain syndrome: systematic re -
view with meta-analysis. Phys Ther Sport . 2013;14:54-59. https:// doi.
org/10.1016/j.ptsp.2012.11.003
Redmond AC, Crane YZ, Menz HB. Normative values for the 
Foot Posture Index. J Foot Ankle Res . 2008;1:6. https:// doi.
org/10.1186/1757-1146-1-6
Sweitzer BA, Cook C, Steadman JR, Hawkins RJ, Wyland DJ. The inter-
rater reliability and diagnostic accuracy of patellar mobility tests in 
patients with anterior knee pain. Phys Sportsmed . 2010;38:90-96. 
https:// doi.org/10.3810/ psm.2010.10.1813
T omsich DA, Nitz AJ, Threlkeld AJ, Shapiro R. Patellofemoral alignment: 
reliability. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1996;23:200-208. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.1996.23.3.200
Van Cant J, Pineux C, Pitance L, Feipel V . Hip muscle strength and 
endurance in females with patellofemoral pain: a systematic review 
with meta-analysis. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2014;9:564-582.
Watson CJ, Leddy HM, Dynjan TD, Parham JL. Reliability of the lateral 
pull test and tilt test to assess patellar alignment in subjects with 
symptomatic knees: student raters. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2001;31:368-374. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2001.31.7 .368
Watson CJ, Propps M, Galt W, Redding A, Dobbs D. Reliability of McCo -
nnell’s classification of patellar orientation in symptomatic and as -
ymptomatic subjects. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1999;29:378-385; 
discussion 386-393. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.1999.29.7 .378
Interventions
Clijsen R, Fuchs J, T aeymans J. Effectiveness of exercise therapy in 
treatment of patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Phys Ther . 2014;94:1697-1708. https:// doi.
org/10.2522/ ptj.20130310
Holden S, Rathleff MS, Jensen MB, Barton CJ. How can we implement 
exercise therapy for patellofemoral pain if we don’t know what was 
prescribed? A systematic review. Br J Sports Med . 2018;52:385. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2017-097547
Kooiker L, Van De Port IG, Weir A, Moen MH. Effects of physical therapist–
guided quadriceps-strengthening exercises for the treatment of patel -
lofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2014;44:391-402. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2014.4127
van der Heijden RA, Lankhorst NE, van Linschoten R, Bierma-Zeinstra 
SM, van Middelkoop M. Exercise for treating patellofemoral pain syn -
drome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2015;1:CD010387 . https:// doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD010387 .pub2
Van Der Heijden RA, Lankhorst NE, Van Linschoten R, Bierma-Zeinstra 
SM, Van Middelkoop M. Exercise for treating patellofemoral pain 
syndrome: an abridged version of Cochrane systematic review. Eur J 
Phys Rehabil Med . 2016;52:110-133.
Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy
Abd Elhafz YN, Abd El Salam MS, Abd Elkader SM. T aping and OKC 
exercises versus taping and CKC exercises in treating patients with 
patellofemoral pain syndrome. Indian J Physiother Occup Ther . 
2011;5:103-106.Bakhtiary AH, Fatemi E. Open versus closed kinetic chain exercises for 
patellar chondromalacia. Br J Sports Med . 2008;42:99-102; discus -
sion 102. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2007 .038109
Escamilla RF , Fleisig GS, Zheng N, Barrentine SW, Wilk KE, Andrews 
JR. Biomechanics of the knee during closed kinetic chain and open 
kinetic chain exercises. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 1998;30:556-569.
Harvie D, O’Leary T , Kumar S. A systematic review of randomized con -
trolled trials on exercise parameters in the treatment of patellofemo -
ral pain: what works? J Multidiscip Healthc . 2011;4:383-392. https://
doi.org/10.2147 / JMDH.S24595
Herrington L, Al-Sherhi A. A controlled trial of weight-bearing versus 
non–weight-bearing exercises for patellofemoral pain. J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther . 2007;37:155-160. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2007 .2433
Powers CM, Ho KY , Chen Y J, Souza RB, Farrokhi S. Patellofemoral joint 
stress during weight-bearing and non–weight-bearing quadriceps 
exercises. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2014;44:320-327 . https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2014.4936
Regelski CL, Ford BL, Hoch MC. Hip strengthening compared with 
quadriceps strengthening in conservative treatment of patients with 
patellofemoral pain: a critically appraised topic. Int J Athl Ther T rain . 
2015;20:4-12. https:// doi.org/10.1123/ijatt.2014-0048
Witvrouw E, Danneels L, Van Tiggelen D, Willems TM, Cambier D. Open 
versus closed kinetic chain exercises in patellofemoral pain: a 5-year 
prospective randomized study. Am J Sports Med . 2004;32:1122-
1130. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0363546503262187
Witvrouw E, Lysens R, Bellemans J, Cambier D, Vanderstraeten G. 
Intrinsic risk factors for the development of anterior knee pain in an 
athletic population. A two-year prospective study. Am J Sports Med . 
2000;28:480-489. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /03635465000280040701
High Versus Low Volume of Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy  
While Avoiding Pain
Østerås B, Østerås H, T orstensen T A. Long-term effects of medical ex -
ercise therapy in patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome: results 
from a single-blinded randomized controlled trial with 12 months 
follow-up. Physiotherapy . 2013;99:311-316. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
physio.2013.04.001
Østerås B, Østerås H, T orstensen T A, Vasseljen O. Dose–response ef -
fects of medical exercise therapy in patients with patellofemoral pain 
syndrome: a randomised controlled clinical trial. Physiotherapy . 
2013;99:126-131. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.physio.2012.05.009
Hip- T argeted Exercise Therapy Compared With Control
de Marche Baldon R, Serrão FV , Scattone Silva R, Piva SR. Effects of 
functional stabilization training on pain, function, and lower extrem -
ity biomechanics in women with patellofemoral pain: a randomized 
clinical trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2014;44:240-251. https://
doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2014.4940APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg82   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesKhayambashi K, Mohammadkhani Z, Ghaznavi K, Lyle MA, Pow -
ers CM. The effects of isolated hip abductor and external rotator 
muscle strengthening on pain, health status, and hip strength in 
females with patellofemoral pain: a randomized controlled trial. J 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2012;42:22-29. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2012.3704
Hip- T argeted Exercise Therapy Compared With Knee- T argeted 
Exercise Therapy
Beutler AI, Cooper LW, Kirkendall DT , Garrett WE, Jr. Electromyographic 
analysis of single-leg, closed chain exercises: implications for reha -
bilitation after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. J Athl T rain . 
2002;37:13-18.
Crossley KM, van Middelkoop M, Callaghan MJ, Collins NJ, Rathleff MS, 
Barton CJ. 2016 patellofemoral pain consensus statement from the 
4th International Patellofemoral Pain Research Retreat, Manchester. 
Part 2: recommended physical interventions (exercise, taping, brac -
ing, foot orthoses and combined interventions). Br J Sports Med . 
2016;50:844-852. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096268
Dolak KL, Silkman C, Medina McKeon J, Hosey RG, Lattermann C, Uhl 
TL. Hip strengthening prior to functional exercises reduces pain 
sooner than quadriceps strengthening in females with patellofemo -
ral pain syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2011;41:560-570. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2011.3499
Escamilla RF , Francisco AC, Kayes AV , Speer KP , Moorman CT , 3rd. An 
electromyographic analysis of sumo and conventional style dead -
lifts. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2002;34:682-688.
Farrokhi S, Pollard CD, Souza RB, Chen Y J, Reischl S, Powers CM. T runk 
position influences the kinematics, kinetics, and muscle activity of 
the lead lower extremity during the forward lunge exercise. J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther . 2008;38:403-409. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2008.2634
Ferber R, Bolgla L, Earl-Boehm JE, Emery C, Hamstra-Wright K. 
Strengthening of the hip and core versus knee muscles for 
the treatment of patellofemoral pain: a multicenter random -
ized controlled trial. J Athl T rain . 2015;50:366-377 . https:// doi.
org/10.4085/1062-6050-49.3.70
Hamada H, Hussein Draz A, Koura GM, Saab IM. Carryover effect 
of hip and knee exercises program on functional performance in 
individuals with patellofemoral pain syndrome. J Phys Ther Sci . 
2017;29:1341-1347 . https:// doi.org/10.1589/jpts.29.1341
Khayambashi K, Fallah A, Movahedi A, Bagwell J, Powers C. Posterolat -
eral hip muscle strengthening versus quadriceps strengthening for 
patellofemoral pain: a comparative control trial. Arch Phys Med Re -
habil . 2014;95:900-907 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2013.12.022
Lack S, Barton C, Sohan O, Crossley K, Morrissey D. Proximal muscle 
rehabilitation is effective for patellofemoral pain: a systematic review 
with meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2015;49:1365-1376. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2015-094723
Reiman MP , Bolgla LA, Loudon JK. A literature review of studies 
evaluating gluteus maximus and gluteus medius activation during 
rehabilitation exercises. Physiother Theory Pract . 2012;28:257-268. 
https:// doi.org/10.3109/09593985.2011.604981Combined Hip- and Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy Compared 
With Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy Alone
Dolak KL, Silkman C, Medina McKeon J, Hosey RG, Lattermann C, Uhl 
TL. Hip strengthening prior to functional exercises reduces pain 
sooner than quadriceps strengthening in females with patellofemo -
ral pain syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2011;41:560-570. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2011.3499
Fukuda TY , Melo WP , Zaffalon BM, et al. Hip posterolateral musculature 
strengthening in sedentary women with patellofemoral pain syn -
drome: a randomized controlled clinical trial with 1-year follow-up. J 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2012;42:823-830. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2012.4184
Fukuda TY , Rossetto FM, Magalhães E, Bryk FF , Lucareli PR, de Almeida 
Carvalho NA. Short-term effects of hip abductors and lateral rota -
tors strengthening in females with patellofemoral pain syndrome: 
a randomized controlled clinical trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
2010;40:736-742. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2010.3246
Lack S, Barton C, Sohan O, Crossley K, Morrissey D. Proximal muscle 
rehabilitation is effective for patellofemoral pain: a systematic review 
with meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2015;49:1365-1376. https:// doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2015-094723
Nascimento LR, T eixeira-Salmela LF , Souza RB, Resende RA. Hip 
and knee strengthening is more effective than knee strengthening 
alone for reducing pain and improving activity in individuals with 
patellofemoral pain: a systematic review with meta-analysis. J 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2018;48:19-31. https:// doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2018.7365
Patellar T aping
Barton C, Balachandar V , Lack S, Morrissey D. Patellar taping for patel -
lofemoral pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate 
clinical outcomes and biomechanical mechanisms. Br J Sports Med . 
2014;48:417-424. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2013-092437
Callaghan MJ, Selfe J. Patellar taping for patellofemoral pain syndrome 
in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2012:CD006717 . https:// doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD006717 .pub2
Clark DI, Downing N, Mitchell J, Coulson L, Syzpryt EP , Doherty M. 
Physiotherapy for anterior knee pain: a randomised controlled 
trial. Ann Rheum Dis . 2000;59:700-704. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
ard.59.9.700
Collins NJ, Bisset LM, Crossley KM, Vicenzino B. Efficacy of nonsurgical 
interventions for anterior knee pain: systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized trials. Sports Med . 2012;42:31-49. https://
doi.org/10.2165/11594460-000000000-00000
Cowan SM, Bennell KL, Hodges PW. Therapeutic patellar taping chang -
es the timing of vasti muscle activation in people with patellofemoral 
pain syndrome. Clin J Sport Med . 2002;12:339-347 .
Crossley KM, van Middelkoop M, Callaghan MJ, Collins NJ, Rathleff MS, 
Barton CJ. 2016 patellofemoral pain consensus statement from the 
4th International Patellofemoral Pain Research Retreat, Manchester. 
Part 2: recommended physical interventions (exercise, taping, brac -
ing, foot orthoses and combined interventions). Br J Sports Med . 
2016;50:844-852. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096268APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg83
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesGhourbanpour A, T alebi GA, Hosseinzadeh S, Janmohammadi N, 
T aghipour M. Effects of patellar taping on knee pain, functional 
disability, and patellar alignments in patients with patellofemoral 
pain syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. J Bodyw Mov Ther . 
2018;22:493-497 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jbmt.2017 .06.005
Günay E, Sarıkaya S, Özdolap Ş, Büyükuysal Ç. Effectiveness of the 
kinesiotaping in the patellofemoral pain syndrome. T urk J Phys Med 
Rehabil . 2017;63:299-306. https:// doi.org/10.5606/tftrd.2017 .711
Keet JHL, Gray J, Harley Y , Lambert MI. The effect of medial patellar 
taping on pain, strength and neuromuscular recruitment in subjects 
with and without patellofemoral pain. Physiotherapy . 2007;93:45-52. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.physio.2006.06.006
Lee CR, Lee DY , Jeong HS, Lee MH. The effects of Kinesio taping on 
VMO and VL EMG activities during stair ascent and descent by per -
sons with patellofemoral pain: a preliminary study. J Phys Ther Sci . 
2012;24:153-156. https:// doi.org/10.1589/jpts.24.153
Whittingham M, Palmer S, Macmillan F . Effects of taping on pain and 
function in patellofemoral pain syndrome: a randomized controlled 
trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2004;34:504-510. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2004.34.9.504
Patellofemoral Knee Orthoses (Bracing)
Smith TO, Drew BT , Meek TH, Clark AB. Knee orthoses for treat -
ing patellofemoral pain syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 
2015:CD010513. https:// doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010513.pub2
Warden SJ, Hinman RS, Watson MA, Jr., Avin KG, Bialocerkowski AE, 
Crossley KM. Patellar taping and bracing for the treatment of chronic 
knee pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arthritis Rheum . 
2008;59:73-83. https:// doi.org/10.1002/ art.23242
Foot Orthoses
Barton CJ, Menz HB, Crossley KM. Clinical predictors of foot or -
thoses efficacy in individuals with patellofemoral pain. Med 
Sci Sports Exerc . 2011;43:1603-1610. https:// doi.org/10.1249/
MSS.0b013e318211c45d
Barton CJ, Menz HB, Levinger P , Webster KE, Crossley KM. Greater 
peak rearfoot eversion predicts foot orthoses efficacy in individuals 
with patellofemoral pain syndrome. Br J Sports Med . 2011;45:697-
701. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2010.077644
Barton CJ, Munteanu SE, Menz HB, Crossley KM. The efficacy of foot 
orthoses in the treatment of individuals with patellofemoral pain syn -
drome: a systematic review. Sports Med . 2010;40:377-395. https://
doi.org/10.2165/11530780-000000000-00000
Collins N, Crossley K, Beller E, Darnell R, McPoil T , Vicenzino B. Foot 
orthoses and physiotherapy in the treatment of patellofemoral pain 
syndrome: randomised clinical trial. BMJ. 2008;337:a1735. https://
doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a1735
Gross MT , Foxworth JL. The role of foot orthoses as an intervention for 
patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2003;33:661-670. 
https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2003.33.11.661
Hossain M, Alexander P , Burls A, Jobanputra P . Foot orthoses for 
patellofemoral pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 
2011:CD008402. https:// doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD008402.pub2Matthews M, Rathleff MS, Claus A, et al. Can we predict the outcome 
for people with patellofemoral pain? A systematic review on prog -
nostic factors and treatment effect modifiers. Br J Sports Med . 
2017;51:1650-1660. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096545
Mills K, Blanch P , Dev P , Martin M, Vicenzino B. A randomised control 
trial of short term efficacy of in-shoe foot orthoses compared with 
a wait and see policy for anterior knee pain and the role of foot 
mobility. Br J Sports Med . 2012;46:247-252. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2011-090204
Mølgaard CM, Rathleff MS, Andreasen J, et al. Foot exercises and foot 
orthoses are more effective than knee focused exercises in individu -
als with patellofemoral pain. J Sci Med Sport . 2018;21:10-15. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2017 .05.019
Sutlive TG, Mitchell SD, Maxfield SN, et al. Identification of individu -
als with patellofemoral pain whose symptoms improved after a 
combined program of foot orthosis use and modified activity: a 
preliminary investigation. Phys Ther . 2004;84:49-61. https:// doi.
org/10.1093/ ptj/84.1.49
Swart NM, van Linschoten R, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, van Middelkoop 
M. The additional effect of orthotic devices on exercise therapy 
for patients with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic re -
view. Br J Sports Med . 2012;46:570-577 . https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsm.2010.080218
Vicenzino B, Collins N, Cleland J, McPoil T . A clinical prediction rule for 
identifying patients with patellofemoral pain who are likely to benefit 
from foot orthoses: a preliminary determination. Br J Sports Med . 
2010;44:862-866. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2008.052613
Biofeedback
dos Anjos Rabelo ND, Costa LOP , de Lima BM, et al. Adding motor 
control training to muscle strengthening did not substantially im -
prove the effects on clinical or kinematic outcomes in women with 
patellofemoral pain: a randomised controlled trial. Gait Posture . 
2017;58:280-286. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2017 .08.018
Dursun N, Dursun E, Kiliç Z. Electromyographic biofeedback–controlled 
exercise versus conservative care for patellofemoral pain syndrome. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 2001;82:1692-1695. https:// doi.org/10.1053/
apmr.2001.26253
Lake DA, Wofford NH. Effect of therapeutic modalities on patients with 
patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. Sports Health . 
2011;3:182-189. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /1941738111398583
LeVeau BF , Rogers C. Selective training of the vastus medialis muscle 
using EMG biofeedback. Phys Ther . 1980;60:1410-1415. https:// doi.
org/10.1093/ ptj/60.11.1410
Wasielewski NJ, Parker TM, Kotsko KM. Evaluation of electro -
myographic biofeedback for the quadriceps femoris: a sys -
tematic review. J Athl T rain . 2011;46:543-554. https:// doi.
org/10.4085/1062-6050-46.5.543
Yip SL, Ng GY . Biofeedback supplementation to physiotherapy exercise 
programme for rehabilitation of patellofemoral pain syndrome: a 
randomized controlled pilot study. Clin Rehabil . 2006;20:1050-1057 . 
https:// doi.org/10.1177 /0269215506071259APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg84   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesRunning Gait Retraining
Bonacci J, Hall M, Saunders N, Vicenzino B. Gait retraining versus 
foot orthoses for patellofemoral pain: a pilot randomised clinical 
trial. J Sci Med Sport . 2018;21:457-461. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
jsams.2017 .09.187
Esculier JF , Bouyer LJ, Dubois B, Frémont P , Moore L, Roy JS. Effects 
of rehabilitation approaches for runners with patellofemoral pain: 
protocol of a randomised clinical trial addressing specific underly -
ing mechanisms. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . 2016;17:5. https:// doi.
org/10.1186/ s12891-015-0859-9
Neal BS, Barton CJ, Gallie R, O’Halloran P , Morrissey D. Runners 
with patellofemoral pain have altered biomechanics which tar -
geted interventions can modify: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Gait Posture . 2016;45:69-82. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
gaitpost.2015.11.018
Roper JL, Harding EM, Doerfler D, et al. The effects of gait retrain -
ing in runners with patellofemoral pain: a randomized trial. Clin 
Biomech (Bristol, Avon) . 2016;35:14-22. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
clinbiomech.2016.03.010
Blood Flow Restriction T raining Plus High-Repetition  
Knee- T argeted Exercise Therapy
Giles L, Webster KE, McClelland J, Cook JL. Quadriceps strengthening 
with and without blood flow restriction in the treatment of patel -
lofemoral pain: a double-blind randomised trial. Br J Sports Med . 
2017;51:1688-1694. https:// doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096329
Needling Therapy
Espí-López GV , Serra-Añó P , Vicent-Ferrando J, et al. Effectiveness of 
inclusion of dry needling in a multimodal therapy program for patel -
lofemoral pain: a randomized parallel-group trial. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther . 2017;47:392-401. https:// doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2017 .7389
Manual Therapy as a Stand-Alone T reatment
Demirci S, Kinikli GI, Callaghan MJ, T unay VB. Comparison of short-
term effects of mobilization with movement and Kinesiotaping 
on pain, function and balance in patellofemoral pain. Acta Or -
thop T raumatol T urc . 2017;51:442-447 . https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.
aott.2017 .09.005
Hains G, Hains F . Patellofemoral pain syndrome managed by isch -
emic compression to the trigger points located in the peri-patellar 
and retro-patellar areas: a randomized clinical trial. Clin Chiropr . 
2010;13:201-209. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.clch.2010.05.001
Jayaseelan DJ, Scalzitti DA, Palmer G, Immerman A, Courtney CA. 
The effects of joint mobilization on individuals with patellofemoral 
pain: a systematic review. Clin Rehabil . 2018;32:722-733. https:// doi.
org/10.1177 /0269215517753971
Khuman R, Devi S, Anandh V , Kamlesh T , Satani K, Nambi G. Patello-
femoral pain syndrome: a comparative study of mobilization verses 
[sic] taping. Int J Pharm Sci Health Care . 2012;2:89-96.
Patle S, Bhave S. A study on the efficacy of manual therapy as an inter -
vention to supervised exercise therapy in patients with anterior knee 
pain: a randomised controlled trial. Indian J Physiother Occup Ther . 
2015;9:92-96. https:// doi.org/10.5958/0973-5674.2015.00060.XStakes NO, Myburgh C, Brantingham JW, Moyer RJ, Jensen M, Globe 
G. A prospective randomized clinical trial to determine efficacy of 
combined spinal manipulation and patella mobilization compared to 
patella mobilization alone in the conservative management of patel -
lofemoral pain syndrome. J Am Chiropr Assoc . 2006;43:11-18.
Biophysical Agents
Bily W, T rimmel L, Mödlin M, Kaider A, Kern H. T raining program and 
additional electric muscle stimulation for patellofemoral pain syn -
drome: a pilot study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 2008;89:1230-1236. 
https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2007 .10.048
Callaghan MJ, Oldham JA. Electric muscle stimulation of the quadri -
ceps in the treatment of patellofemoral pain. Arch Phys Med Rehabil . 
2004;85:956-962. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2003.07 .021
Callaghan MJ, Oldham JA, Winstanley J. A comparison of two types of 
electrical stimulation of the quadriceps in the treatment of patello -
femoral pain syndrome. A pilot study. Clin Rehabil . 2001;15:637-646. 
https:// doi.org/10.1191/0269215501cr457oa
Lake DA, Wofford NH. Effect of therapeutic modalities on patients with 
patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. Sports Health . 
2011;3:182-189. https:// doi.org/10.1177 /1941738111398583
Combined Interventions
Barton CJ, Lack S, Hemmings S, T ufail S, Morrissey D. The ‘Best 
Practice Guide to Conservative Management of Patellofemoral 
Pain’: incorporating level 1 evidence with expert clinical reason -
ing. Br J Sports Med . 2015;49:923-934. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2014-093637
Clark DI, Downing N, Mitchell J, Coulson L, Syzpryt EP , Doherty M. 
Physiotherapy for anterior knee pain: a randomised controlled 
trial. Ann Rheum Dis . 2000;59:700-704. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
ard.59.9.700
Esculier JF , Bouyer LJ, Dubois B, Frémont P , Moore L, Roy JS. Effects 
of rehabilitation approaches for runners with patellofemoral pain: 
protocol of a randomised clinical trial addressing specific underly -
ing mechanisms. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . 2016;17:5. https:// doi.
org/10.1186/ s12891-015-0859-9
Moyano FR, Valenza MC, Martin LM, Caballero YC, Gonzalez-Jimenez E, 
Demet GV . Effectiveness of different exercises and stretching physio -
therapy on pain and movement in patellofemoral pain syndrome: a 
randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil . 2013;27:409-417 . https://
doi.org/10.1177 /0269215512459277
Rathleff MS, Roos EM, Olesen JL, Rasmussen S. Exercise during 
school hours when added to patient education improves outcome 
for 2 years in adolescent patellofemoral pain: a cluster randomised 
trial. Br J Sports Med . 2015;49:406-412. https:// doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2014-093929
Song CY , Lin YF , Wei TC, Lin DH, Y en TY , Jan MH. Surplus value of hip 
adduction in leg-press exercise in patients with patellofemoral pain 
syndrome: a randomized controlled trial. Phys Ther . 2009;89:409-
418. https:// doi.org/10.2522/ ptj.20080195APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg85
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelinesvan Linschoten R, van Middelkoop M, Berger MY , et al. Supervised 
exercise therapy versus usual care for patellofemoral pain syndrome: 
an open label randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2009;339:b4074. 
https:// doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b4074Y oung JL, Rhon DI, Cleland JA, Snodgrass SJ. The influence of exercise 
dosing on outcomes in patients with knee disorders: a systematic 
review. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2018;48:146-161. https:// doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2018.7637APPENDIX E
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg86   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesLEVELS OF EVIDENCE TABLE*
Level Intervention/PreventionPathoanatomic/Risk/  
Clinical Course/Prognosis/
Differential DiagnosisDiagnosis/Diagnostic 
AccuracyPrevalence of Condition/
Disorder Exam/Outcomes
I Systematic review of high-
quality RCT s
High-quality RCT†Systematic review of pro -
spective cohort studies
High-quality prospective 
cohort study‡Systematic review of high-
quality diagnostic studies
High-quality diagnostic 
study§ with validationSystematic review, high-
quality cross-sectional 
studies
High-quality cross-sectional 
study║Systematic review of pro -
spective cohort studies
High-quality prospective 
cohort study
II Systematic review of high-
quality cohort studies
High-quality cohort study‡
Outcomes study or ecologi -
cal study
Lower-quality RCT¶Systematic review of retro -
spective cohort study
Lower-quality prospective 
cohort study
High-quality retrospective 
cohort study
Consecutive cohort
Outcomes study or ecologi -
cal studySystematic review of explor -
atory diagnostic studies 
or consecutive cohort 
studies
High-quality exploratory 
diagnostic studies
Consecutive retrospective 
cohortSystematic review of stud -
ies that allows relevant 
estimate
Lower-quality cross-section -
al studySystematic review of lower-
quality prospective co -
hort studies
Lower-quality prospective 
cohort study
III Systematic reviews of case-
control studies
High-quality case-control 
study
Lower-quality cohort studyLower-quality retrospective 
cohort study
High-quality cross-sectional 
study
Case-control studyLower-quality exploratory 
diagnostic studies
Nonconsecutive retrospec -
tive cohortLocal nonrandom study High-quality cross-sectional 
study
IV Case series Case series Case-control study Lower-quality cross-sectional 
study
V Expert opinion Expert opinion Expert opinion Expert opinion Expert opinion
Abbreviation: RCT, randomized clinical trial.
*Adapted from Phillips et al228 (http://www.cebm.net/index.aspx?o=1025 ). See also APPENDIX G .
†High quality includes RCTs with greater than 80% follow-up, blinding, and appropriate randomization procedures.
‡High-quality cohort study includes greater than 80% follow-up.
§High-quality diagnostic study includes consistently applied reference standard and blinding.
‖High-quality prevalence study is a cross-sectional study that uses a local and current random sample or censuses.
¶Weaker diagnostic criteria and reference standards, improper randomization, no blinding, and less than 80% follow-up may add bias and threats to validity.APPENDIX F
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg87
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesAPPENDIX G
PROCEDURES FOR ASSIGNING LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
• Level of evidence is assigned based on the study design using 
the Levels of Evidence table ( APPENDIX F ), assuming high quality 
(eg, for intervention, randomized clinical trial starts at level I)
• Study quality is assessed using the critical appraisal tool, and 
the study is assigned 1 of 4 overall quality ratings based on the 
critical appraisal results
• Level of evidence assignment is adjusted based on the overall 
quality rating:
- High quality (high confidence in the estimate/ results): study 
remains at assigned level of evidence (eg, if the randomized 
clinical trial is rated high quality, its final assignment is level 
I). High quality should include:
• Randomized clinical trial with greater than 80% follow-up, 
blinding, and appropriate randomization procedures
• Cohort study includes greater than 80% follow-up• Diagnostic study includes consistently applied reference 
standard and blinding
• Prevalence study is a cross-sectional study that uses a  
local and current random sample or censuses
- Acceptable quality (the study does not meet requirements 
for high quality and weaknesses limit the confidence in the 
accuracy of the estimate): downgrade 1 level
• Based on critical appraisal results
- Low quality: the study has significant limitations that sub -
stantially limit confidence in the estimate: downgrade 2 
levels
• Based on critical appraisal results
- Unacceptable quality: serious limitations—exclude from  
consideration in the guideline
• Based on critical appraisal results
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg88   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPATELLOFEMORAL PAIN CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE CRITICAL APPRAISAL SCORES
Risk Factors: Level of Evidence*
Study I II III IV V
Apibantaweesakul 2017 X
Aysin et al 2018 X
Barton et al 2009 X
Barton et al 2010 X
Bolgla et al 2015 X
Bolgla et al 2016 X
Boling et al 2009 X
Boling et al 2010 X
Carlson et al 2017 X
Collins et al 2013 X
Collins et al 2008 X
Collins et al 2009 X
de Moura Campos Carvalho-e-Silva et al 2016 X
De Oliveira Silva et al 2019 X
Dowling et al 2015 X
Giles et al 2013 X
Giles et al 2017 X
Guney et al 2016 X
Hall et al 2015 X
Hoglund et al 2018 X
Lankhorst et al 2013 X
Lankhorst et al 2016 X
Luedke et al 2015 X
Maclachlan et al 2017 X
Matthews et al 2017 X
McMoreland et al 2011 X
McPoil et al 2011 X
Mucha et al 2017 X
Neal et al 2016 X
Nunes et al 2018 X
Panken et al 2015 X
Pappas and Wong- T om 2012 X
Park et al 2011 X
Ramskov et al 2015 X
Rathleff et al 2014 X
Semciw et al 2016 X
Steinberg et al 2017 X
T an et al 2018 X
Van Cant et al 2014 X
Van Cant et al 2017 X
Van Middelkoop et al 2017 X
Van Tiggelen et al 2004 X
Vicenzino et al 2008 X
Waryasz and McDermott 2008 X
Witvrouw et al 2000 X
*Levels of evidence adapted from Phillips et al228: (I) Systematic review of prospective cohort studies; high-quality prospective cohort 
study; (II) Systematic review of retrospective cohort studies; lower-quality prospective cohort study; high-quality retrospective cohort 
study; consecutive cohort; outcomes study or ecological study; (III) Lower-quality retrospective cohort study; high-quality cross-section -
al study; case-control study; (IV) Case series; (V) Expert opinion.APPENDIX H
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg89
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesExamination: Patient-Reported Outcome Measures, AMSTAR* Systematic Review
Study 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Esculier et al 2013 Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y CS N Y High
Green et al 2014 Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y CS CS N Acceptable
Howe et al 2012 N Y Y N N Y N N CS N N Low
Papadopoulos et al 2015 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y High
Abbreviations: AMSTAR, A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews; CS, can't say; N, no; Y, yes.
*AMSTAR items: (1) Was an “a priori” design provided?; (2) Was there duplicate study selection and data extraction?; (3) Was a comprehensive literature 
search performed?; (4) Was the status of publication (ie, gray literature) used as an inclusion criterion?; (5) Was a list of studies (included and excluded) 
provided?; (6) Were the characteristics of the included studies provided?; (7) Was the scientific quality of the included studies assessed and documented?; (8) 
Was the scientific quality of the included studies used appropriately in formulating conclusions?; (9) Were the methods used to combine the findings of studies 
appropriate?; (10) Was the likelihood of publication bias assessed?; (11) Was the conflict of interest included?; (12) What is your overall assessment of the meth -
odological quality of this review? (high, acceptable, low, unacceptable).
Examination: Patient-Reported Outcome Measures, CASP Systematic Review*
Study 1 2 3 4 5 6
Almeida et al 2017 Y Y Y Y N N
Bradbury et al 2013 Y Y Y Y Y Y
Chesworth et al 1989 Y Y Y N Y Y
Crossley et al 2004 Y NA NA Y Y Y
Crossley et al 2018 Y Y Y CS Y Y
Décary et al 2018 Y Y Y Y Y Y
Ittenbach et al 2016 Y CS CS CS Y Y
Laprade and Culham 2002 Y Y Y Y Y Y
Lee et al 2012 Y Y Y CS Y Y
Myer et al 2016 Y Y Y Y Y Y
Piva et al 2009 Y NA NA NA Y Y
Selfe et al 2001 (validity, reliability) N N Y CS Y Y
Siqueira et al 2012 Y CS CS Y Y Y
Watson et al 2005 Y Y N Y Y Y
Abbreviations: CASP, Critical Appraisal Skills Program; CS, can’t say; N, no; NA, not applicable; Y, yes.
*CASP items: (1) Was there a clear question for the study to address?; (2) Was there a comparison with an appropriate reference standard?; (3) Did all patients 
get the diagnostic test and reference standard?; (4) Could the results of the test have been influenced by the results of the reference standard?; (5) Is the disease 
status of the tested population clearly described?; (6) Were the methods for performing the test described in sufficient detail?APPENDIX H
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg90   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesExamination: Patient-Reported Outcome Measures, COSMIN Systematic Review*
Study 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Overall
Almeida et al 2017 N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y NA NA NA NA NA NA Y Y Y High
Bradbury et al 2013 Y Y N Y Y N Y Y N N NA NA NA NA NA NA Y Y Y Acceptable
Chesworth et al 1989 Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y N N NA NA NA NA NA NA Y Y Y High
Crossley et al 2004 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y NA NA NA Y Y Y Y Y High
Crossley et al 2018 Y Y Y Y Y CS Y Y Y Y Y CS CS CS Y Y Y Y Y High
Décary et al 2018 Y Y Y Y Y NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Y Y Y High
Ittenbach et al 2016 Y Y Y Y Y CS CS CS Y Y CS CS CS CS CS CS Y Y Y High
Laprade and Culham 2002 N Y N Y Y N Y Y N N NA NA NA NA NA NA Y Y Y High
Lee et al 2012 Y Y N CS Y CS Y Y Y N CS CS CS CS CS CS Y Y Y High
Myer et al 2016 Y Y Y CS CS CS N N Y Y CS CS CS CS CS CS Y Y Y High
Piva et al 2009 Y Y Y Y Y NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Y Y Y High
Selfe et al 2001 (validity, 
reliability)Y Y Y CS CS N Y Y Y N Y Y Y CS CS CS Y Y Y High
Siqueira et al 2012 CS CS CS CS CS NA Y Y Y CS CS CS CS CS CS CC Y Y Y High
Watson et al 2005 Y Y N Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y NA NA NA Y Y Y Y Y High
Abbreviations: COSMIN, COnsensus-based Standards for the selection of health status Measurement INstruments; CS, can’t say; N, no; NA, not applicable; Y, yes.
*COSMIN items: (1) Was there an assessment of whether all items refer to relevant aspects of the construct to be measured?; (2) Was there an assessment of 
whether all items are relevant for the study population? (eg, age, gender, disease characteristics, country, setting); (3) Was there an assessment of whether all 
items are relevant for the purpose of the measurement instrument? (discriminative, evaluative, and/or predictive); (4) Can the criterion used or employed be 
considered as a reasonable “gold standard”?; (5) For continuous scores: Were correlations or the area under the receiver operating curve (ROC) calculated? For 
dichotomous scores: Were sensitivity and specificity determined?; (6) Was the percentage of missing items given?; (7) Were at least 2 measurements avail -
able?; (8) Was the time interval appropriate?; (9) For continuous scores: Was an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) calculated? For dichotomous/nominal/
ordinal scores: Was kappa calculated?; (10) For CTT: Was the standard error of measurement (SEM), smallest detectable change (SDC), or limits of agree -
ment (LoA) calculated?; (11) Was a longitudinal design with at least 2 measurements used?; (12) Were hypotheses about changes in scores formulated a priori 
(ie, before data collection)?; (13) Was the expected direction of correlations or mean differences of the change scores of HR-PRO instruments included in these 
hypotheses?; (14) Were the expected absolute or relative magnitude of correlations or mean differences of the change scores of HR-PRO instruments included in 
these hypotheses?; (15) Can the criterion for change be considered as a reasonable gold standard?; (16) For continuous scores: Were correlations between change 
scores, or the area under the ROC calculated? For dichotomous scales: Were sensitivity and specificity (changed versus not changed) determined?; (17) Can the 
results be applied to your patients/the population of interest?; (18) Can the test be applied to your patient or population of interest?; (19) Were all outcomes 
important to the individual or population considered?APPENDIX H
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg91
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesExamination: Patient-Reported Outcome Measures, Cross-cultural, COSMIN Systematic Review*
Study 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Overall
Alshehri et al 2017 CS Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N High
Apivatgaroon et al 2016 N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N High
Buckinx et al 2019 N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y N Y High
Buckinx 2017b N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N Acceptable
Celik et al 2013 Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N Acceptable
Cheung et al 2012 Y Y Y N N N N N N N N Y CS N Acceptable
Cheung et al 2013 N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y N N Acceptable
da Cunha et al 2013 N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N High
Evcik et al 2009 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N Y N High
Gil-Gámez et al 2016 N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N High
Kuru et al 2010 Y Y N Y Y Y Y N CS Y N Y Y N High
Negahban et al 2012 N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y N N Acceptable
Negahban et al 2013 N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y N Y High
Papadopoulos et al 2017 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y N N High
Sakunkaruna et al 2015 N N Y Y N N Y Y Y N N Y Y N Acceptable
Ummels et al 2017 N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N High
Abbreviations: COSMIN, COnsensus-based Standards for the selection of health status Measurement INstruments; CS, can’t say; N, no; Y, yes.
*COSMIN items: (1) Was the percentage of missing items given?; (2) Was there a description of how missing items were handled?; (3) Was the sample size 
included in the analysis adequate?; (4) Were both the original language in which the HR-PRO instrument was developed, and the language in which the 
HR-PRO instrument was translated, described?; (5) Was the expertise of the people involved in the translation process adequately described? (eg, expertise in 
the disease(s) involved, expertise in the construct to be measured, expertise in both languages); (6) Did the translators work independently from each other?; 
(7) Were items translated forward and backward?; (8) Was there an adequate description of how differences between the original and translated versions were 
resolved?; (9) Was the translation reviewed by a committee (eg, original developers)?; (10) Was the HR-PRO instrument pretested (eg, cognitive interviews) to 
check interpretation, cultural relevance of the translation, and ease of comprehension?; (11) Was the sample used in the pretest adequately described?; (12) Were 
the samples similar for all characteristics except language and/or cultural background?; (13) Were there any important flaws in the design or methods of the 
study?; (14) For CTT: Was confirmatory factor analysis performed? For IRT: Was differential item function (DIF) between language groups assessed?
Examination: Physical Impairments/ Activity Limitations, AMSTAR* Systematic Review
Study 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Chuter 2012 Y N Y Y N Y N Y CS N Y Acceptable
Cook et al 2012 Y Y Y Y N N Y Y CS N Y Acceptable
Décary et al 2016 Y Y Y N N Y Y Y Y N Y High
Fredericson and Y oon 2006 Y N N N N Y N N CS N N Low
Lankhorst et al 2013 Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y N Y High
Nunes et al 2013 Y Y Y N N Y Y Y CS N Y Acceptable
Papadopoulos et al 2015 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y High
Abbreviations: AMSTAR, A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews ; CS, can’t say; N, no; Y, yes.
*AMSTAR items: (1) Was an “a priori” design provided?; (2) Was there duplicate study selection and data extraction?; (3) Was a comprehensive literature 
search performed?; (4) Was the status of publication (ie, grayliterature) used as an inclusion criterion?; (5) Was a list of studies (included and excluded) 
provided?; (6) Were the characteristics of the included studies provided?; (7) Was the scientific quality of the included studies assessed and documented?; (8) 
Was the scientific quality of the included studies used appropriately in formulating conclusions?; (9) Were the methods used to combine the findings of studies 
appropriate?; (10) Was the likelihood of publication bias assessed?; (11) Was the conflict of interest included?; (12) What is your overall assessment of the meth -
odological quality of this review? (high, acceptable, low, unacceptable).APPENDIX H
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg92   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesExamination: Physical Impairments/ Activity Limitations, CASP Systematic Review*
Study 1 2 3 4 5 6
Nijs et al 2006 Y N N NA N Y
Piva et al 2006 Y NA NA NA NA NA
Piva et al 2009 Y NA NA NA NA NA
Scholtes and Salsich 2017 Y CS CS CS Y Y
Selfe et al 2001 (validity, reliability) Y N N N Y Y
van der Heijden 2015 Y NA NA NA Y Y
Abbreviations: CASP, Critical Appraisal Skills Program; CS, can’t say; N, no; NA, not applicable; Y, yes.
*CASP items: (1) Was there a clear question for the study to address? (2) Was there a comparison with an appropriate reference standard?; (3) Did all patients 
get the diagnostic test and reference standard?; (4) Could the results of the test have been influenced by the results of the reference standard?; (5) Is the disease 
status of the tested population clearly described?; (6) Were the methods for performing the test described in sufficient detail?
Examination: Physical Impairments/ Activity Limitations, COSMIN Systematic Review*
Study 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Overall
Nijs et al 2006 Y Y Y N N NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Y Y Y High
Piva et al 2006 Y Y N NA NA Y Y Y Y Y NA NA NA NA NA NA Y Y Y High
Piva et al 2009 Y Y Y CS CS NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Y Y Y High
Scholtes and Salsich 2017 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y CS CS CS CS CS CS Y Y Y High
Selfe et al 2001 (validity, 
reliability)CS CS CS CS CS N Y NA N NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Y N N Acceptable
van der Heijden et al 2015 NA NA NA NA NA Y Y CS Y N CS CS CS CS CS CS Y Y Y High
Abbreviations: COSMIN, COnsensus-based Standards for the selection of health status Measurement INstruments; CS, can’t say; N, no; NA, not applicable; Y, yes.
*COSMIN items: (1) Was there an assessment of whether all items refer to relevant aspects of the construct to be measured?; (2) Was there an assessment of 
whether all items are relevant for the study population? (eg, age, gender, disease characteristics, country, setting); (3) Was there an assessment of whether all 
items are relevant for the purpose of the measurement instrument? (discriminative, evaluative, and/or predictive); (4) Can the criterion used or employed be 
considered as a reasonable “gold standard”?; (5) For continuous scores: Were correlations or the area under the receiver operating curve (ROC) calculated? For 
dichotomous scores: Were sensitivity and specificity determined?; (6) Was the percentage of missing items given?; (7) Were at least 2 measurements avail -
able?; (8) Was the time interval appropriate?; (9) For continuous scores: Was an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) calculated? For dichotomous/nominal/
ordinal scores: Was kappa calculated?; (10) For CTT: Was the standard error of measurement (SEM), smallest detectable change (SDC), or limits of agree -
ment (LoA) calculated?; (11) Was a longitudinal design with at least 2 measurements used?; (12) Were hypotheses about changes in scores formulated a priori 
(ie, before data collection)?; (13) Was the expected direction of correlations or mean differences of the change scores of HR-PRO instruments included in these 
hypotheses?; (14) Were the expected absolute or relative magnitude of correlations or mean differences of the change scores of HR-PRO instruments included in 
these hypotheses?; (15) Can the criterion for change be considered as a reasonable gold standard?; (16) For continuous scores: Were correlations between change 
scores, or the area under the ROC calculated? For dichotomous scales: Were sensitivity and specificity (changed versus not changed) determined?; (17) Can the 
results be applied to your patients/the population of interest?; (18) Can the test be applied to your patient or population of interest?; (19) Were all outcomes 
important to the individual or population considered?
Examination: Physical Impairments/ Activity Limitations, Level of Evidence*
Study I II III IV V
Chmielewski et al 2004 X
Collins et al 2016 X
Décary et al 2018 X
Näslund et al 2006 X
Watson et al 1999 X
Watson et al 2001 X
*Levels of evidence adapted from Phillips et al228: (I) Systematic review of prospective cohort studies; high-quality prospective cohort study; (II) Systematic 
review of retrospective cohort studies; lower-quality prospective cohort study; high-quality retrospective cohort study; consecutive cohort; outcomes study or 
ecological study; (III) Lower-quality retrospective cohort study; high-quality cross-sectional study; case-control study; (IV) Case series; (V) Expert opinion.APPENDIX H
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg93
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesInterventions: SIGN Systematic Review*
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Clijsen et al 2014 N CA Y N N N Y Y Y Y N Acceptable
Holden et al 2018 Y Y Y N N N Y Y Y N Y Acceptable
Kooiker et al 2014 NA CA Y CA Y Y Y Y Y N N Acceptable
Lack et al 2015 N CA Y CA N N Y Y Y N N Low
van der Heijden et al 2015 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N High
van der Heijden et al 2016 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N High
Harvie et al 2011 N CA Y N N N Y N N N N Low
Collins et al 2012 N N Y N N N Y Y Y N N Low
Lake and Wofford 2011 N CA Y N N N Y N N N N Low
Wasielewski et al 2011 N Y N N Y Y Y Y Y N N Acceptable
Barton et al 2010 N CA Y N Y Y Y Y Y N N Acceptable
Swart et al 2012 N Y Y N N Y Y Y Y N N Acceptable
Warden et al 2008 Y N Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y N High
Hossain et al 2011 Y Y Y CA Y N Y Y Y Y N High
Matthews et al 2017 N Y Y CA Y Y N Y Y N Y Acceptable
Neal et al 2016 Y Y Y N N Y Y N Y N Y Acceptable
Y oung et al 2018 N Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y N Y High
Callaghan and Selfe 2012 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N High
Smith et al 2015 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N High
Abbreviation: CA, can’t answer; N, no; SIGN, Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network; Y, yes.
*SIGN items: (1) The study addresses a clearly defined research question; (2) At least 2 people should select studies and extract data; (3) A comprehensive litera -
ture search is carried out; (4) The authors clearly state if or how they limited their review by publication type; (5) The included and excluded studies are listed; 
(6) The characteristics of the included studies are provided; (7) The scientific quality of the included studies is assessed and documented; (8) The scientific 
quality of the included studies was assessed appropriately; (9) Appropriate methods are used to combine the individual study findings; (10) The likelihood of 
publication bias is assessed; (11) Conflicts of interest are declared; (12) What is your overall assessment of the methodological quality of this review? (high qual -
ity, 8 or greater; acceptable, 5 or greater; low, 4 or less).APPENDIX H
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


cpg94   |  september 2019  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesInterventions: PEDro*
Study 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Abd Elhafz et al 2011 Y Y N Y N N Y Y N Y Y Acceptable
Bakhtiary and Fatemi 2008 N Y Y Y N N N N Y Y Y Acceptable
de Marche Baldon et al 2014 Y Y Y Y N N N Y Y Y Y High
Bily et al 2008 Y Y Y Y N N N N N Y Y Acceptable
Bolgla et al 2016 Y Y N Y N N N N Y N Y Acceptable
Bonacci et al 2018 Y Y Y Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Callaghan et al 2001 Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y N Y Y High
Callaghan and Oldham 2004 Y Y N Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Clark et al 2000 Y Y N Y N N Y Y Y Y Y High
Collins et al 2009 Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y High
Crossley et al 2002 Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y High
Demirci et al 2017 N Y N Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Dolak et al 2011 Y Y N Y N N Y N Y Y Y Acceptable
Dursun et al 2001 Y Y N Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Esculier et al 2016 Y Y Y N N N N Y Y Y Y Acceptable
Espí-López et al 2017 Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y High
Ferber et al 2015 Y Y Y Y N N N N Y Y Y Acceptable
Fukuda et al 2010 Y Y Y Y N N Y Y N Y Y High
Fukuda et al 2012 Y Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y Y High
Ghourbanpour et al 2018 N Y N Y N N N N N Y Y Low
Giles et al 2017 Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y High
Günay et al 2017 Y Y N Y N N N N N Y Y Acceptable
Hains and Hains 2010 Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y High
Ahmed Hamada et al 2017 N Y Y Y N N Y Y N Y Y Acceptable
Herrington and Al-Sherhi  2007 Y Y Y Y N N Y Y N Y N Acceptable
Khayambashi et al 2012 Y Y N Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Khayambashi et al 2014 N N N Y N N N Y N Y Y Low
Moyano et al 2013 Y Y Y Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Østerås et al 2013 Y Y Y Y N N Y N N Y Y Acceptable
Østerås et al 2013 Y Y Y Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Patle and Bhave 2015 Y Y N N N N N N N N N Low
dos Anjos Rabelo et al 2017 Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y High
Rathleff et al 2015 Y Y N Y N N Y N Y Y Y Acceptable
Roper et al 2016 N Y N Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Song et al 2009 Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y High
Stakes et al 2006 Y Y Y Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Sutlive et al 2004 Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y High
Syme 2009 Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y High
van Linschoten et al 2009 Y Y N Y N N N Y Y Y Y Acceptable
Whittingham et al 2004 Y Y N Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y High
Witvrouw et al 2004 N Y Y Y N N Y N Y Y Y Acceptable
Witvrouw et al 2000 N Y Y Y N N N Y N Y Y Acceptable
Yip and Ng 2006 N Y N Y N N Y Y N Y Y Acceptable
Abbreviations: N, no; PEDro, Physiotherapy Evidence Database; Y, yes.
*(1) Eligibility criteria were specified; (2) Subjects were randomly allocated to groups (in a crossover study, subjects were randomly allocated in the order in 
which treatments were received); (3) Allocation was concealed; (4) The groups were similar at baseline regarding the most important prognostic indicators; (5) 
There was blinding of all subjects; (6) There was blinding of all therapists who administered the therapy; (7) There was blinding of all assessors who measured 
at least 1 key outcome; (8) Measures of at least 1 key outcome were obtained from more than 85% of the subjects initially allocated to groups; (9) All subjects for 
whom outcome measures were available received the treatment or control condition as allocated, or, where this was not the case, data for at least 1 key outcome 
were analyzed by “intention to treat”; (10) The results of between-group statistical comparisons are reported for at least 1 key outcome; (11) The study provides 
both point measures and measures of variability for at least 1 key outcome; (12) What is your overall assessment of the methodological quality of this review? 
(high quality, 8 or greater; acceptable, 5 or greater; low, 4 or less).APPENDIX H
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 49  |  number 9  |  september 2019  |  cpg95
Patellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesPatellofemoral Pain: Clinical Practice GuidelinesInterventions: Other, Level of Evidence*
Study I II III IV V
Crossley et al 2016 X
Crossley et al 2016 X
*Levels of evidence adapted from Phillips et al228: (I) Systematic review of prospective cohort studies; high-quality prospective cohort study; (II) Systematic 
review of retrospective cohort studies; lower-quality prospective cohort study; high-quality retrospective cohort study; consecutive cohort; outcomes study or 
ecological study; (III) Lower-quality retrospective cohort study; high-quality cross-sectional study; case-control study; (IV) Case series; (V) Expert opinion.APPENDIX H
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on November 12, 2025. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2019 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.


